 anarchism is a political philosophy that advocates self governed societies with voluntary institutions.
 these are often described as stateless societies but several authors have defined them more specifically as institutions based on non hierarchical free associations .
 anarchism holds the state to be undesirable unnecessary or harmful.
 the following sources cite anarchism as a political philosophy while anti statism is central anarchism entails opposing authority or hierarchical organisation in the conduct of human relations including but not limited to the state system.
 anarchism draws on many currents of thought and strategy.
 anarchism does not offer a fixed body of doctrine from a single particular world view instead fluxing and flowing as a philosophy.
 there are many types and traditions of anarchism not all of which are mutually exclusive.
 anarchist schools of thought can differ fundamentally supporting anything from extreme individualism to complete collectivism.
 strains of anarchism have often been divided into the categories of social and individualist anarchism or similar dual classifications.
 anarchism is usually considered a radical left wing ideology and much of anarchist economics and anarchist legal philosophy reflect anti authoritarian interpretations of communism collectivism syndicalism mutualism or participatory economics .
 etymology and terminology the term is a compound word composed from the word anarchy and the suffix ism themselves derived respectively from the greek i.
e.
 anarchy from anarchos meaning one without rulers from the privative prefix an i.
e.
 without and archos i.
e.
 leader ruler cf.
 archon or arkh i.
e.
 authority sovereignty realm magistracy and the suffix or ismos isma from the verbal infinitive suffix izein .
 the first known use of this word was in one five three nine .
 various factions within the french revolution labelled opponents as anarchists as robespierre did the h bertists although few shared many views of later anarchists.
 there would be many revolutionaries of the early nineteenth century who contributed to the anarchist doctrines of the next generation such as william godwin and wilhelm weitling but they did not use the word anarchist or anarchism in describing themselves or their beliefs.
 the first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist was pierre joseph proudhon marking the formal birth of anarchism in the mid nineteenth century.
 since the one eight nine zero s and beginning in france the term libertarianism has often been used as a synonym for anarchism and was used almost exclusively in this sense until the one nine five zero s in the united states its use as a synonym is still common outside the united states.
 on the other hand some use libertarianism to refer to individualistic free market philosophy only referring to free market anarchism as libertarian anarchism .
 history origins woodcut from a diggers document by william everard the earliest anarchist themes can be found in the six th century bc among the works of taoist philosopher laozi and in later centuries by zhuangzi and bao jingyan.
 zhuangzi s philosophy has been described by various sources as anarchist.
 zhuangzi wrote a petty thief is put in jail.
 a great becomes a ruler of a nation.
 diogenes of sinope and the cynics their contemporary zeno of citium the founder of stoicism also introduced similar topics.
 jesus is sometimes considered the first anarchist in the christian anarchist tradition.
 georges lechartier wrote that the true founder of anarchy was jesus christ and .
.
.
 the first anarchist society was that of the apostles .
 in early islamic history some manifestations of anarchic thought are found during the islamic civil war over the caliphate where the kharijites insisted that the imamate is a right for each individual within the islamic society.
 later some muslim scholars such as amer al basri and abu hanifa led movements of boycotting the rulers paving the way to the waqf endowments tradition which served as an alternative to and asylum from the centralized authorities of the emirs.
 but such interpretations reverberates subversive religious conceptions like the aforementioned seemingly anarchistic taoist teachings and that of other anti authoritarian religious traditions creating a complex relationship regarding the question as to whether or not anarchism and religion are compatible .
 this is exemplified when the glorification of the state is viewed as a form of sinful idolatry .
 the french renaissance political philosopher tienne de la bo tie wrote in his most famous work the discourse on voluntary servitude what some historians consider an important anarchist precedent.
 the radical protestant christian gerrard winstanley and his group the diggers are cited by various authors as proposing anarchist social measures in the one seven th century in england.
 the term anarchist first entered the english language in one six four two during the english civil war as a term of abuse used by royalists against their roundhead opponents.
 by the time of the french revolution some such as the enrag s began to use the term positively in opposition to jacobin centralisation of power seeing revolutionary government as oxymoron ic.
 by the turn of the one nine th century the english word anarchism had lost its initial negative connotation.
 modern anarchism sprang from the secular or religious thought of the enlightenment particularly jean jacques rousseau s arguments for the moral centrality of freedom.
 as part of the political turmoil of the one seven nine zero s in the wake of the french revolution william godwin developed the first expression of modern anarchist thought .
 godwin was according to peter kropotkin the first to formulate the political and economical conceptions of anarchism even though he did not give that name to the ideas developed in his work while godwin attached his anarchist ideas to an early edmund burke .
 upright william godwin the first to formulate the political and economical conceptions of anarchism even though he did not give that name to the ideas developed in his work .
 godwin is generally regarded as the founder of the school of thought known as philosophical anarchism .
 he argued in political justice one seven nine three that government has an inherently malevolent influence on society and that it perpetuates dependency and ignorance.
 he thought that the spread of the use of reason to the masses would eventually cause government to wither away as an unnecessary force.
 although he did not accord the state with moral legitimacy he was against the use of revolutionary tactics for removing the government from power.
 rather he advocated for its replacement through a process of peaceful evolution.
 his aversion to the imposition of a rules based society led him to denounce as a manifestation of the people s mental enslavement the foundations of law property rights and even the institution of marriage.
 he considered the basic foundations of society as constraining the natural development of individuals to use their powers of reasoning to arrive at a mutually beneficial method of social organisation.
 in each case government and its institutions are shown to constrain the development of our capacity to live wholly in accordance with the full and free exercise of private judgment.
 the french pierre joseph proudhon is regarded as the first self proclaimed anarchist a label he adopted in his groundbreaking work what is property published in one eight four zero .
 it is for this reason that some claim proudhon as the founder of modern anarchist theory.
 he developed the theory of spontaneous order in society where organisation emerges without a central coordinator imposing its own idea of order against the wills of individuals acting in their own interests his famous quote on the matter is liberty is the mother not the daughter of order.
 in what is property proudhon answers with the famous accusation property is theft .
 in this work he opposed the institution of decreed property propri t where owners have complete rights to use and abuse their property as they wish.
 he contrasted this with what he called possession or limited ownership of resources and goods only while in more or less continuous use.
 later however proudhon added that property is liberty and argued that it was a bulwark against state power.
 his opposition to the state organised religion and certain capitalist practices inspired subsequent anarchists and made him one of the leading social thinkers of his time.
 the anarcho communist joseph d jacque was the first person to describe himself as libertarian .
 unlike pierre joseph proudhon he argued that it is not the product of his or her labour that the worker has a right to but to the satisfaction of his or her needs whatever may be their nature.
 in one eight four four in germany the post hegelian philosopher max stirner published the book the ego and its own which would later be considered an influential early text of individualist anarchism .
 french anarchists active in the one eight four eight revolution included anselme bellegarrigue ernest coeurderoy joseph d jacque and pierre joseph proudhon .
 first international and the paris commune upright collectivist anarchist mikhail bakunin opposed the marxist aim of dictatorship of the proletariat in favour of universal rebellion and allied himself with the federalists in the first international before his expulsion by the marxists.
 in europe harsh reaction followed the revolutions of one eight four eight during which ten countries had experienced brief or long term social upheaval as groups carried out nationalist uprisings.
 after most of these attempts at systematic change ended in failure conservative elements took advantage of the divided groups of socialists anarchists liberals and nationalists to prevent further revolt.
 in spain ram n de la sagra established the anarchist journal el porvenir in la coru a in one eight four five which was inspired by proudhon s ideas.
 the catalan politician francesc pi i margall became the principal translator of proudhon s works into spanish and later briefly became president of spain in one eight seven three while being the leader of the democratic republican federal party.
 according to george woodcock these translations were to have a profound and lasting effect on the development of spanish anarchism after one eight seven zero but before that time proudhonian ideas as interpreted by pi already provided much of the inspiration for the federalist movement which sprang up in the early one eight six zero s.
 according to the encyclopedia britannica during the spanish revolution of one eight seven three pi y margall attempted to establish a decentralized or cantonalist political system on proudhonian lines.
 in one eight six four the international workingmen s association sometimes called the first international united diverse revolutionary currents including french followers of proudhon blanquists philadelphes english trade unionists socialists and social democrats .
 due to its links to active workers movements the international became a significant organisation.
 karl marx became a leading figure in the international and a member of its general council.
 proudhon s followers the mutualists opposed marx s state socialism advocating political abstentionism and small property holdings.
 woodcock also reports that the american individualist anarchists lysander spooner and william b.
 greene had been members of the first international .
 in one eight six eight following their unsuccessful participation in the league of peace and freedom lpf russian revolutionary mikhail bakunin and his collectivist anarchist associates joined the first international which had decided not to get involved with the lpf .
 they allied themselves with the federalist socialist sections of the international who advocated the revolutionary overthrow of the state and the collectivization of property.
 at first the collectivists worked with the marxists to push the first international in a more revolutionary socialist direction.
 subsequently the international became polarised into two camps with marx and bakunin as their respective figureheads.
 bakunin characterised marx s ideas as centralist and predicted that if a marxist party came to power its leaders would simply take the place of the ruling class they had fought against.
 anarchist historian george woodcock reports that the annual congress of the international had not taken place in one eight seven zero owing to the outbreak of the paris commune and in one eight seven one the general council called only a special conference in london.
 one delegate was able to attend from spain and none from italy while a technical excuse that they had split away from the f d ration romande was used to avoid inviting bakunin s swiss supporters.
 thus only a tiny minority of anarchists was present and the general council s resolutions passed almost unanimously.
 most of them were clearly directed against bakunin and his followers.
 in one eight seven two the conflict climaxed with a final split between the two groups at the hague congress where bakunin and james guillaume were expelled from the international and its headquarters were transferred to new york.
 in response the federalist sections formed their own international at the st.
 imier congress adopting a revolutionary anarchist program.
 the paris commune was a government that briefly ruled paris from one eight march more formally from two eight march to two eight may one eight seven one .
 the commune was the result of an uprising in paris after france was defeated in the franco prussian war.
 anarchists participated actively in the establishment of the paris commune.
 they included george woodcock states organised labour the anti authoritarian sections of the first international were the precursors of the anarcho syndicalists seeking to replace the privilege and authority of the state with the free and spontaneous organisation of labour.
 in one eight eight six the federation of organized trades and labor unions fotlu of the united states and canada unanimously set one may one eight eight six as the date by which the eight hour work day would become standard.
 upright a sympathetic engraving by walter crane of the executed anarchists of chicago after the haymarket affair .
 the haymarket affair is generally considered the most significant event for the origin of international may day observances.
 in response unions across the united states prepared a general strike in support of the event.
 on three may in chicago a fight broke out when strikebreaker s attempted to cross the picket line and two workers died when police opened fire upon the crowd.
 the next day four may anarchists staged a rally at chicago s haymarket square.
 a bomb was thrown by an unknown party near the conclusion of the rally killing an officer.
 in the ensuing panic police opened fire on the crowd and each other.
 seven police officers and at least four workers were killed.
 eight anarchists directly and indirectly related to the organisers of the rally were arrested and charged with the murder of the deceased officer.
 the men became international political celebrities among the labour movement.
 four of the men were executed and a fifth committed suicide prior to his own execution.
 the incident became known as the haymarket affair and was a setback for the labour movement and the struggle for the eight hour day.
 in one eight nine zero a second attempt this time international in scope to organise for the eight hour day was made.
 the event also had the secondary purpose of memorializing workers killed as a result of the haymarket affair.
 although it had initially been conceived as a once off event by the following year the celebration of international workers day on may day had become firmly established as an international worker s holiday.
 in one nine zero seven the international anarchist congress of amsterdam gathered delegates from one four different countries among which important figures of the anarchist movement including errico malatesta pierre monatte luigi fabbri beno t broutchoux emma goldman rudolf rocker and christiaan cornelissen .
 various themes were treated during the congress in particular concerning the organisation of the anarchist movement popular education issues the general strike or antimilitarism .
 a central debate concerned the relation between anarchism and syndicalism or trade union ism .
 malatesta and monatte were in particular disagreement themselves on this issue as the latter thought that syndicalism was revolutionary and would create the conditions of a social revolution while malatesta did not consider syndicalism by itself sufficient.
 he thought that the trade union movement was reformist and even conservative citing as essentially bourgeois and anti worker the phenomenon of professional union officials.
 malatesta warned that the syndicalists aims were in perpetuating syndicalism itself whereas anarchists must always have anarchy as their end and consequently refrain from committing to any particular method of achieving it.
 the spanish workers federation in one eight eight one was the first major anarcho syndicalist movement anarchist trade union federations were of special importance in spain.
 the most successful was the confederaci n nacional del trabajo national confederation of labour cnt founded in one nine one zero .
 before the one nine four zero s the cnt was the major force in spanish working class politics attracting one .
 five eight million members at one point and playing a major role in the spanish civil war .
 the cnt was affiliated with the international workers association a federation of anarcho syndicalist trade unions founded in one nine two two with delegates representing two million workers from one five countries in europe and latin america.
 in latin america in particular the anarchists quickly became active in organizing craft and industrial workers throughout south and central america and until the early one nine two zero s most of the trade unions in mexico brazil peru chile and argentina were anarcho syndicalist in general outlook the prestige of the spanish c.
n.
t.
 as a revolutionary organization was undoubtedly to a great extent responsible for this situation.
 the largest and most militant of these organizations was the federaci n obrera regional argentina .
.
.
 it grew quickly to a membership of nearly a quarter of a million which dwarfed the rival socialdemocratic unions.
 propaganda of the deed and illegalism upright italian american anarchist luigi galleani .
 his followers known as galleanists carried out a series of bombings and assassination attempts from one nine one four to one nine three two in what they saw as attacks on tyrants and enemies of the people some anarchists such as johann most advocated publicizing violent acts of retaliation against counter revolutionaries because we preach not only action in and for itself but also action as propaganda.
 by the one eight eight zero s people inside and outside the anarchist movement began to use the slogan propaganda of the deed to refer to individual bombings regicide s and tyrannicide s.
 from one nine zero five onwards the russian counterparts of these anti syndicalist anarchist communists become partisans of economic terrorism and illegal expropriations .
 illegalism as a practice emerged and within it the acts of the anarchist bombers and assassins propaganda by the deed and the anarchist burglars individual reappropriation expressed their desperation and their personal violent rejection of an intolerable society.
 moreover they were clearly meant to be exemplary invitations to revolt.
 .
 france s bonnot gang was the most famous group to embrace illegalism.
 however as soon as one eight eight seven important figures in the anarchist movement distanced themselves from such individual acts.
 peter kropotkin thus wrote that year in le r volt that a structure based on centuries of history cannot be destroyed with a few kilos of dynamite .
 a variety of anarchists advocated the abandonment of these sorts of tactics in favour of collective revolutionary action for example through the trade union movement.
 the anarcho syndicalist fernand pelloutier argued in one eight nine five for renewed anarchist involvement in the labour movement on the basis that anarchism could do very well without the individual dynamiter.
 state repression including the infamous one eight nine four french lois sc l rates of the anarchist and labour movement s following the few successful bombings and assassinations may have contributed to the abandonment of these kinds of tactics although reciprocally state repression in the first place may have played a role in these isolated acts.
 the dismemberment of the french socialist movement into many groups and following the suppression of the one eight seven one paris commune the execution and exile of many communards to penal colonies favoured individualist political expression and acts.
 historian benedict anderson thus writes in march one eight seven one the commune took power in the abandoned city and held it for two months.
 then versailles seized the moment to attack and in one horrifying week executed roughly two zero zero zero zero communards or suspected sympathizers a number higher than those killed in the recent war or during robespierre s terror of one seven nine three one seven nine four .
 more than seven five zero zero were jailed or deported to places like new caledonia.
 thousands of others fled to belgium england italy spain and the united states.
 in one eight seven two stringent laws were passed that ruled out all possibilities of organising on the left.
 not till one eight eight zero was there a general amnesty for exiled and imprisoned communards.
 meanwhile the third republic found itself strong enough to renew and reinforce louis napoleon s imperialist expansion in indochina africa and oceania.
 many of france s leading intellectuals and artists had participated in the commune courbet was its quasi minister of culture rimbaud and pissarro were active propagandists or were sympathetic to it.
 the ferocious repression of one eight seven one and thereafter was probably the key factor in alienating these milieux from the third republic and stirring their sympathy for its victims at home and abroad.
 according to some analysts in post war germany the prohibition of the communist party kdp and thus of institutional far left political organisation may also in the same manner have played a role in the creation of the red army faction .
 numerous heads of state were assassinated between one eight eight one and one nine one four by members of the anarchist movement including tsar alexander ii of russia president sadi carnot of france empress elisabeth of austria king umberto i of italy president william mckinley of the united states king carlos i of portugal and king george i of greece .
 mckinley s assassin leon czolgosz claimed to have been influenced by anarchist and feminist emma goldman .
 propaganda of the deed was abandoned by the vast majority of the anarchist movement after world war i one nine one four one nine one eight and the one nine one seven october revolution .
 russian revolution and other uprisings of the one nine one zero s nestor makhno with members of the anarchist revolutionary insurrectionary army of ukraine anarchists participated alongside the bolshevik s in both february and october revolutions and were initially enthusiastic about the bolshevik revolution.
 however following a political falling out with the bolsheviks by the anarchists and other left wing opposition the conflict culminated in the one nine two one kronstadt rebellion which the new government repressed.
 anarchists in central russia were either imprisoned driven underground or joined the victorious bolsheviks the anarchists from petrograd and moscow fled to ukraine .
 there in the free territory they fought in the civil war against the whites a grouping of monarchists and other opponents of the october revolution and then the bolsheviks as part of the revolutionary insurrectionary army of ukraine led by nestor makhno who established an anarchist society in the region for a number of months.
 expelled american anarchists emma goldman and alexander berkman were amongst those agitating in response to bolshevik policy and the suppression of the kronstadt uprising before they left russia.
 both wrote accounts of their experiences in russia criticising the amount of control the bolsheviks exercised.
 for them bakunin s predictions about the consequences of marxist rule that the rulers of the new socialist marxist state would become a new elite had proved all too true.
 the victory of the bolsheviks in the october revolution and the resulting russian civil war did serious damage to anarchist movements internationally.
 many workers and activists saw bolshevik success as setting an example communist parties grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist movements.
 in france and the united states for example members of the major syndicalist movements of the cgt and iww left the organisations and joined the communist international .
 the revolutionary wave of one nine one seven two three saw the active participation of anarchists in varying degrees of protagonism.
 in the german uprising known as the german revolution of one nine one eight one nine one nine which established the bavarian soviet republic the anarchists gustav landauer silvio gesell and erich m hsam had important leadership positions within the revolutionary councilist structures.
 in the italian events known as the biennio rosso the anarcho syndicalist trade union unione sindacale italiana grew to eight zero zero zero zero zero members and the influence of the italian anarchist union two zero zero zero zero members plus umanita nova its daily paper grew accordingly .
.
.
 anarchists were the first to suggest occupying workplaces.
 in the mexican revolution the mexican liberal party was established and during the early one nine one zero s it led a series of military offensives leading to the conquest and occupation of certain towns and districts in baja california with the leadership of anarcho communist ricardo flores mag n .
 in paris the dielo truda group of russian anarchist exiles which included nestor makhno concluded that anarchists needed to develop new forms of organisation in response to the structures of bolshevism.
 their one nine two six manifesto called the organisational platform of the general union of anarchists draft was supported.
 platformist groups active today include the workers solidarity movement in ireland and the north eastern federation of anarchist communists of north america.
 synthesis anarchism emerged as an organisational alternative to platformism that tries to join anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adjectives .
 in the one nine two zero s this form found as its main proponents volin and sebastien faure .
 it is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global international of anarchist federations .
 conflicts with european fascist regimes in the one nine two zero s and one nine three zero s the rise of fascism in europe transformed anarchism s conflict with the state.
 italy saw the first struggles between anarchists and fascists.
 italian anarchists played a key role in the anti fascist organisation arditi del popolo which was strongest in areas with anarchist traditions and achieved some success in their activism such as repelling blackshirts in the anarchist stronghold of parma in august one nine two two .
 the veteran italian anarchist luigi fabbri was one of the first critical theorists of fascism describing it as the preventive counter revolution.
 in france where the far right leagues came close to insurrection in the february one nine three four riots anarchists divided over a united front policy.
 anarchists in france and italy were active in the resistance during world war ii .
 in germany the anarchist erich m hsam was arrested on charges unknown in the early morning hours of two eight february one nine three three within a few hours after the reichstag fire in berlin.
 joseph goebbels the nazi propaganda minister labelled him as one of those jewish subversives.
 over the next seventeen months he would be imprisoned in the concentration camps at sonnenburg brandenburg and finally oranienburg .
 on two february one nine three four m hsam was transferred to the concentration camp at oranienburg when finally on the night of nine july one nine three four m hsam was tortured and murdered by the guards his battered corpse found hanging in a latrine the next morning.
 spanish revolution in spain the national anarcho syndicalist trade union confederaci n nacional del trabajo initially refused to join a popular front electoral alliance and abstention by cnt supporters led to a right wing election victory.
 but in one nine three six the cnt changed its policy and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power.
 months later the former ruling class responded with an attempted coup causing the spanish civil war one nine three six one nine three nine .
 in response to the army rebellion an anarchist inspired movement of peasants and workers supported by armed militias took control of barcelona and of large areas of rural spain where they collectivised the land.
 but even before the fascist victory in one nine three nine the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the stalinists who controlled much of the distribution of military aid to the republican cause from the soviet union .
 the events known as the spanish revolution was a workers social revolution that began during the outbreak of the spanish civil war in one nine three six and resulted in the widespread implementation of anarchist and more broadly libertarian socialist organisational principles throughout various portions of the country for two to three years primarily catalonia aragon andalusia and parts of the levante .
 much of spain s economy was put under worker control in anarchist strongholds like catalonia the figure was as high as seven five but lower in areas with heavy communist party of spain influence as the soviet allied party actively resisted attempts at collectivization enactment.
 factories were run through worker committees agrarian areas became collectivised and run as libertarian communes .
 anarchist historian sam dolgoff estimated that about eight million people participated directly or at least indirectly in the spanish revolution which he claimed came closer to realizing the ideal of the free stateless society on a vast scale than any other revolution in history.
 stalinist led troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted both dissident marxists and anarchists.
 the prominent italian anarchist camillo berneri who volunteered to fight against franco was killed instead in spain by gunmen associated with the spanish communist party .
 post war years anarchism sought to reorganise itself after the war and in this context the organisational debate between synthesis anarchism and platformism took importance once again especially in the anarchist movements of italy and france .
 the mexican anarchist federation was established in one nine four five after the anarchist federation of the centre united with the anarchist federation of the federal district.
 in the early one nine four zero s the antifascist international solidarity and the federation of anarchist groups of cuba merged into the large national organisation asociaci n libertaria de cuba cuban libertarian association .
 from one nine four four to one nine four seven the bulgarian anarchist communist federation reemerged as part of a factory and workplace committee movement but was repressed by the new communist regime.
 in one nine four five in france the f d ration anarchiste and the anarchosyndicalist trade union conf d ration nationale du travail was established in the next year while the also synthesist federazione anarchica italiana was founded in italy .
 korean anarchists formed the league of free social constructors in september one nine four five and in one nine four six the japanese anarchist federation was founded.
 an international anarchist congress with delegates from across europe was held in paris in may one nine four eight .
 after world war ii an appeal in the fraye arbeter shtime detailing the plight of german anarchists and called for americans to support them.
 by february one nine four six the sending of aid parcels to anarchists in germany was a large scale operation.
 the federation of libertarian socialists was founded in germany in one nine four seven and rudolf rocker wrote for its organ die freie gesellschaft which survived until one nine five three .
 in one nine five six the uruguayan anarchist federation was founded.
 in one nine five five the anarcho communist federation of argentina renamed itself as the argentine libertarian federation .
 the syndicalist workers federation was a syndicalist group in active in post war britain and one of solidarity federation s earliest predecessors.
 it was formed in one nine five zero by members of the dissolved anarchist federation of britain.
 unlike the afb which was influenced by anarcho syndicalist ideas but ultimately not syndicalist itself the swf decided to pursue a more definitely syndicalist worker centred strategy from the outset.
 anarchism continued to influence important literary and intellectual personalities of the time such as albert camus herbert read paul goodman dwight macdonald allen ginsberg george woodcock leopold kohr julian beck john cage and the french surrealist group led by andr breton which now openly embraced anarchism and collaborated in the f d ration anarchiste .
 anarcho pacifism became influential in the anti nuclear movement and anti war movement s of the time as can be seen in the activism and writings of the english anarchist member of campaign for nuclear disarmament alex comfort or the similar activism of the american catholic anarcho pacifists ammon hennacy and dorothy day .
 anarcho pacifism became a basis for a critique of militarism on both sides of the cold war .
 the resurgence of anarchist ideas during this period is well documented in robert graham s anarchism a documentary history of libertarian ideas volume two the emergence of the new anarchism one nine three nine one nine seven seven .
 contemporary anarchism the famous okupas squat near parc g ell overlooking barcelona .
 squatting was a prominent part of the emergence of renewed anarchist movement from the counterculture of the one nine six zero s and one nine seven zero s.
 on the roof occupy and resist a surge of popular interest in anarchism occurred in western nations during the one nine six zero s and one nine seven zero s.
 anarchism was influential in the counterculture of the one nine six zero s and anarchists actively participated in the late sixties students and workers revolts .
 in one nine six eight in carrara italy the international of anarchist federations was founded during an international anarchist conference held there in one nine six eight by the three existing european federations of france the f d ration anarchiste the federazione anarchica italiana of italy and the iberian anarchist federation as well as the bulgaria n federation in french exile.
 in the united kingdom in the one nine seven zero s this was associated with the punk rock movement as exemplified by bands such as crass and the sex pistols .
 the housing and employment crisis in most of western europe led to the formation of communes and squatter movements like that of barcelona spain.
 in denmark squatter s occupied a disused military base and declared the freetown christiania an autonomous haven in central copenhagen.
 since the revival of anarchism in the mid two zero th century a number of new movements and schools of thought emerged.
 although feminist tendencies have always been a part of the anarchist movement in the form of anarcha feminism they returned with vigour during the second wave of feminism in the one nine six zero s.
 anarchist anthropologist david graeber and anarchist historian andrej grubacic have posited a rupture between generations of anarchism with those who often still have not shaken the sectarian habits of the one nine th century contrasted with the younger activists who are much more informed among other elements by indigenous feminist ecological and cultural critical ideas and who by the turn of the two one st century formed by far the majority of anarchists.
 around the turn of the two one st century anarchism grew in popularity and influence as part of the anti war anti capitalist and anti globalisation movement s.
 anarchists became known for their involvement in protests against the meetings of the world trade organization wto group of eight and the world economic forum .
 some anarchist factions at these protests engaged in rioting property destruction and violent confrontations with police.
 these actions were precipitated by ad hoc leaderless anonymous cadres known as black bloc s other organisational tactics pioneered in this time include security culture affinity groups and the use of decentralised technologies such as the internet.
 a significant event of this period was the confrontations at wto conference in seattle in one nine nine nine .
 according to anarchist scholar simon critchley contemporary anarchism can be seen as a powerful critique of the pseudo libertarianism of contemporary neo liberalism .
.
.
 one might say that contemporary anarchism is about responsibility whether sexual ecological or socio economic it flows from an experience of conscience about the manifold ways in which the west ravages the rest it is an ethical outrage at the yawning inequality impoverishment and disenfranchisment that is so palpable locally and globally.
 international anarchist federations in existence include the international of anarchist federations the international workers association and international libertarian solidarity .
 the largest organised anarchist movement today is in spain in the form of the confederaci n general del trabajo cgt and the cnt .
 cgt membership was estimated at around one zero zero zero zero zero for two zero zero three .
 other active syndicalist movements include in sweden the central organisation of the workers of sweden and the swedish anarcho syndicalist youth federation the cnt ait in france the union sindicale italiana in italy in the us workers solidarity alliance and the uk solidarity federation and anarchist federation .
 the revolutionary industrial unionist industrial workers of the world claiming three zero zero zero paying members and the international workers association an anarcho syndicalist successor to the first international also remain active.
 anarchist schools of thought upright portrait of philosopher pierre joseph proudhon one eight zero nine one eight six five by gustave courbet .
 proudhon was the primary proponent of anarchist mutualism and influenced many later individualist anarchist and social anarchist thinkers.
 anarchist schools of thought had been generally grouped in two main historical traditions individualist anarchism and social anarchism which have some different origins values and evolution.
 the individualist wing of anarchism emphasises negative liberty i.
e.
 opposition to state or social control over the individual while those in the social wing emphasise positive liberty to achieve one s potential and argue that humans have needs that society ought to fulfill recognizing equality of entitlement .
 in a chronological and theoretical sense there are classical those created throughout the one nine th century and post classical anarchist schools those created since the mid two zero th century and after.
 beyond the specific factions of anarchist thought is philosophical anarchism which embodies the theoretical stance that the state lacks moral legitimacy without accepting the imperative of revolution to eliminate it.
 a component especially of individualist anarchism philosophical anarchism may accept the existence of a minimal state as unfortunate and usually temporary necessary evil but argue that citizens do not have a moral obligation to obey the state when its laws conflict with individual autonomy.
 one reaction against sectarianism within the anarchist milieu was anarchism without adjectives a call for toleration first adopted by fernando tarrida del m rmol in one eight eight nine in response to the bitter debates of anarchist theory at the time.
 in abandoning the hyphenated anarchisms i.
e.
 collectivist communist mutualist and individualist anarchism it sought to emphasise the anti authoritarian beliefs common to all anarchist schools of thought.
 classical anarchist schools of thought mutualism mutualism began in one eight th century english and french labour movements before taking an anarchist form associated with pierre joseph proudhon in france and others in the united states.
 proudhon proposed spontaneous order whereby organisation emerges without central authority a positive anarchy where order arises when everybody does what he wishes and only what he wishes and where business transactions alone produce the social order.
 it is important to recognize that proudhon distinguished between ideal political possibilities and practical governance.
 for this reason much in contrast to some of his theoretical statements concerning ultimate spontaneous self governance proudhon was heavily involved in french parliamentary politics and allied himself not with anarchist but socialist factions of workers movements and in addition to advocating state protected charters for worker owned cooperatives promoted certain nationalization schemes during his life of public service.
 mutualist anarchism is concerned with reciprocity free association voluntary contract federation and credit and currency reform.
 according to the american mutualist william batchelder greene each worker in the mutualist system would receive just and exact pay for his work services equivalent in cost being exchangeable for services equivalent in cost without profit or discount.
 mutualism has been retrospectively characterised as ideologically situated between individualist and collectivist forms of anarchism.
 avrich paul.
 anarchist voices an oral history of anarchism in america princeton university press one nine nine six isbn zero six nine one zero four four nine four five p.
 six blackwell encyclopaedia of political thought blackwell publishing one nine nine one isbn zero six three one one seven nine four four five p.
 one one .
 proudhon first characterised his goal as a third form of society the synthesis of communism and property.
 individualist anarchism individualist anarchism refers to several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasize the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants such as groups society traditions and ideological systems.
 individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualistic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict.
 in one seven nine three william godwin who has often been cited as the first anarchist wrote political justice which some consider the first expression of anarchism.
 godwin a philosophical anarchist from a rationalist and utilitarian basis opposed revolutionary action and saw a minimal state as a present necessary evil that would become increasingly irrelevant and powerless by the gradual spread of knowledge.
 godwin advocated individualism proposing that all cooperation in labour be eliminated on the premise that this would be most conducive with the general good.
 one nine th century philosopher max stirner usually considered a prominent early individualist anarchist sketch by friedrich engels .
 an influential form of individualist anarchism called egoism or egoist anarchism was expounded by one of the earliest and best known proponents of individualist anarchism the german max stirner .
 stirner s the ego and its own published in one eight four four is a founding text of the philosophy.
 according to stirner the only limitation on the rights of the individual is their power to obtain what they desire without regard for god state or morality.
 to stirner rights were spooks in the mind and he held that society does not exist but the individuals are its reality .
 stirner advocated self assertion and foresaw unions of egoists non systematic associations continually renewed by all parties support through an act of will which stirner proposed as a form of organisation in place of the state .
 egoist anarchists argue that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous union between individuals.
 egoism has inspired many interpretations of stirner s philosophy.
 it was re discovered and promoted by german philosophical anarchist and lgbt activist john henry mackay .
 josiah warren is widely regarded as the first american anarchist and the four page weekly paper he edited during one eight three three the peaceful revolutionist was the first anarchist periodical published.
 for american anarchist historian eunice minette schuster it is apparent .
.
.
 that proudhonian anarchism was to be found in the united states at least as early as one eight four eight and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the individualist anarchism of josiah warren and stephen pearl andrews .
.
.
 william b.
 greene presented this proudhonian mutualism in its purest and most systematic form.
 .
 henry david thoreau one eight one seven one eight six two was an important early influence in individualist anarchist thought in the united states and europe.
 thoreau was an american author poet naturalist tax resister development critic surveyor historian philosopher and leading transcendentalist .
 he is best known for his books walden a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings and his essay civil disobedience an argument for individual resistance to civil government in moral opposition to an unjust state.
 later benjamin tucker fused stirner s egoism with the economics of warren and proudhon in his eclectic influential publication liberty .
 from these early influences individualist anarchism in different countries attracted a small but diverse following of bohemian artists and intellectuals free love and birth control advocates see anarchism and issues related to love and sex individualist naturists nudists see anarcho naturism freethought and anti clerical activists as well as young anarchist outlaws in what became known as illegalism and individual reclamation see european individualist anarchism and individualist anarchism in france .
 these authors and activists included oscar wilde emile armand han ryner henri zisly renzo novatore miguel gimenez igualada adolf brand and lev chernyi among others.
 social anarchism social anarchism calls for a system with common ownership of means of production and democratic control of all organisations without any government authority or coercion .
 it is the largest school of thought in anarchism.
 social anarchism rejects private property seeing it as a source of social inequality while retaining respect for personal property and emphasises cooperation and mutual aid .
 collectivist anarchism collectivist anarchism also referred to as revolutionary socialism or a form of such is a revolutionary form of anarchism commonly associated with mikhail bakunin and johann most .
 collectivist anarchists oppose all private ownership of the means of production instead advocating that ownership be collectivised.
 this was to be achieved through violent revolution first starting with a small cohesive group through acts of violence or propaganda by the deed which would inspire the workers as a whole to revolt and forcibly collectivise the means of production.
 however collectivization was not to be extended to the distribution of income as workers would be paid according to time worked rather than receiving goods being distributed according to need as in anarcho communism.
 this position was criticised by anarchist communists as effectively uphold ing the wages system .
 collectivist anarchism arose contemporaneously with marxism but opposed the marxist dictatorship of the proletariat despite the stated marxist goal of a collectivist stateless society.
 anarchist communist and collectivist ideas are not mutually exclusive although the collectivist anarchists advocated compensation for labour some held out the possibility of a post revolutionary transition to a communist system of distribution according to need.
 anarcho communism anarchist communism also known as anarcho communism libertarian communism and occasionally as free communism is a theory of anarchism that advocates abolition of the state market s money private property while retaining respect for personal property and capitalism in favour of common ownership of the means of production direct democracy and a horizontal network of voluntary association s and workers council s with production and consumption based on the guiding principle from each according to his ability to each according to his need .
 upright russian theorist peter kropotkin one eight four two one nine two one who was influential in the development of anarchist communism some forms of anarchist communism such as insurrectionary anarchism are strongly influenced by egoism and radical individualism believing anarcho communism is the best social system for the realization of individual freedom.
 most anarcho communists view anarcho communism as a way of reconciling the opposition between the individual and society.
 anarcho communism developed out of radical socialist currents after the french revolution but was first formulated as such in the italian section of the first international .
 the theoretical work of peter kropotkin took importance later as it expanded and developed pro organisationalist and insurrectionary anti organisationalist sections.
 to date the best known examples of an anarchist communist society i.
e.
 established around the ideas as they exist today and achieving worldwide attention and knowledge in the historical canon are the anarchist territories during the spanish revolution and the free territory during the russian revolution .
 through the efforts and influence of the spanish anarchists during the spanish revolution within the spanish civil war starting in one nine three six anarchist communism existed in most of aragon parts of the levante and andalusia as well as in the stronghold of anarchist catalonia before being crushed by the combined forces of the regime that won the war hitler mussolini spanish communist party repression backed by the ussr as well as economic and armaments blockades from the capitalist countries and the spanish republic itself.
 during the russian revolution anarchists such as nestor makhno worked to create and defend through the revolutionary insurrectionary army of ukraine anarchist communism in the free territory of the ukraine from one nine one nine before being conquered by the bolsheviks in one nine two one .
 anarcho syndicalism may day demonstration of spanish anarcho syndicalist trade union cnt in bilbao basque country in two zero one zero anarcho syndicalism is a branch of anarchism that focuses on the labour movement .
 anarcho syndicalists view labour unions as a potential force for revolutionary social change replacing capitalism and the state with a new society democratically self managed by workers.
 the basic principles of anarcho syndicalism are workers direct action and workers self management anarcho syndicalists believe that only direct action that is action concentrated on directly attaining a goal as opposed to indirect action such as electing a representative to a government position will allow workers to liberate themselves.
 moreover anarcho syndicalists believe that workers organisations the organisations that struggle against the wage system which in anarcho syndicalist theory will eventually form the basis of a new society should be self managing.
 they should not have bosses or business agents rather the workers should be able to make all the decisions that affect them themselves.
 rudolf rocker was one of the most popular voices in the anarcho syndicalist movement.
 he outlined a view of the origins of the movement what it sought and why it was important to the future of labour in his one nine three eight pamphlet anarcho syndicalism .
 the international workers association is an international anarcho syndicalist federation of various labour unions from different countries.
 the spanish confederaci n nacional del trabajo played and still plays a major role in the spanish labour movement .
 it was also an important force in the spanish civil war .
 post classical schools of thought lawrence jarach left and john zerzan right two prominent contemporary anarchist authors.
 zerzan is known as prominent voice within anarcho primitivism while jarach is a noted advocate of post left anarchy .
 anarchism continues to generate many philosophies and movements at times eclectic drawing upon various sources and syncretic combining disparate concepts to create new philosophical approaches.
 green anarchism or eco anarchism is a school of thought within anarchism that emphasizes environmental issues with an important precedent in anarcho naturism and whose main contemporary currents are anarcho primitivism and social ecology .
 anarcha feminism also called anarchist feminism and anarcho feminism combines anarchism with feminism .
 it generally views patriarchy as a manifestation of involuntary coercive hierarchy that should be replaced by decentralised free association .
 anarcha feminists believe that the struggle against patriarchy is an essential part of class struggle and the anarchist struggle against the state .
 in essence the philosophy sees anarchist struggle as a necessary component of feminist struggle and vice versa.
 l.
 susan brown claims that as anarchism is a political philosophy that opposes all relationships of power it is inherently feminist .
 anarcha feminism began with the late one nine th century writings of early feminist anarchists such as emma goldman and voltairine de cleyre .
 anarcho pacifism is a tendency that rejects violence in the struggle for social change see non violence .
 it developed mostly in the netherlands britain and the united states before and during the second world war .
 christian anarchism is a movement in political theology that combines anarchism and christianity.
 its main proponents included leo tolstoy dorothy day ammon hennacy and jacques ellul .
 platformism is a tendency within the wider anarchist movement based on the organisational theories in the tradition of dielo truda s organisational platform of the general union of anarchists draft .
 the document was based on the experiences of russian anarchists in the one nine one seven october revolution which led eventually to the victory of the bolsheviks over the anarchists and other groups.
 the platform attempted to address and explain the anarchist movement s failures during the russian revolution .
 synthesis anarchism is a form of anarchism that tries to join anarchists of different tendencies under the principles of anarchism without adjectives .
 in the one nine two zero s this form found as its main proponents the anarcho communists voline and s bastien faure .
 it is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global international of anarchist federations .
 post left anarchy is a recent current in anarchist thought that promotes a critique of anarchism s relationship to traditional left wing politics .
 some post leftists seek to escape the confines of ideology in general also presenting a critique of organisations and morality .
 influenced by the work of max stirner and by the marxist situationist international post left anarchy is marked by a focus on social insurrection and a rejection of leftist social organisation.
 insurrectionary anarchism is a revolutionary theory practice and tendency within the anarchist movement which emphasizes insurrection within anarchist practice.
 it is critical of formal organisations such as labour unions and federations that are based on a political programme and periodic congresses.
 instead insurrectionary anarchists advocate informal organisation and small affinity group based organisation.
 insurrectionary anarchists put value in attack permanent class conflict and a refusal to negotiate or compromise with class enemies.
 post anarchism is a theoretical move towards a synthesis of classical anarchist theory and poststructuralist thought drawing from diverse ideas including post modernism autonomist marxism post left anarchy situationist international and postcolonialism .
 left wing market anarchism strongly affirm the classical liberal ideas of self ownership and free markets while maintaining that taken to their logical conclusions these ideas support strongly anti corporatist anti hierarchical pro labor positions and anti capitalism in economics and anti imperialism in foreign policy.
 anarcho capitalism advocates the elimination of the state in favour of individual sovereignty in a free market .
 anarcho capitalism developed from radical anti state libertarianism and individualist anarchism drawing from austrian school economics study of law and economics and public choice theory .
 there is a strong current within anarchism which does not consider that anarcho capitalism can be considered a part of the anarchist movement due to the fact that anarchism has historically been an anti capitalist movement and for definitional reasons which see anarchism incompatible with capitalist forms.
 internal issues and debates which forms of violence if any are consistent with anarchist values is a controversial subject among anarchists.
 anarchism is a philosophy that embodies many diverse attitudes tendencies and schools of thought as such disagreement over questions of values ideology and tactics is common.
 the compatibility of capitalism nationalism and religion with anarchism is widely disputed.
 similarly anarchism enjoys complex relationships with ideologies such as marxism communism and capitalism .
 anarchists may be motivated by humanism divine authority enlightened self interest veganism or any number of alternative ethical doctrines.
 phenomena such as civilization technology e.
g.
 within anarcho primitivism and the democratic process may be sharply criticised within some anarchist tendencies and simultaneously lauded in others.
 on a tactical level while propaganda of the deed was a tactic used by anarchists in the one nine th century e.
g.
 the nihilist movement some contemporary anarchists espouse alternative direct action methods such as nonviolence counter economics and anti state cryptography to bring about an anarchist society.
 about the scope of an anarchist society some anarchists advocate a global one while others do so by local ones.
 the diversity in anarchism has led to widely different use of identical terms among different anarchist traditions which has led to many definitional concerns in anarchist theory .
 topics of interest intersecting and overlapping between various schools of thought certain topics of interest and internal disputes have proven perennial within anarchist theory.
 free love upright french individualist anarchist emile armand one eight seven two one nine six two who propounded the virtues of free love in the parisian anarchist milieu of the early two zero th century an important current within anarchism is free love .
 free love advocates sometimes traced their roots back to josiah warren and to experimental communities viewed sexual freedom as a clear direct expression of an individual s sovereignty.
 free love particularly stressed women s rights since most sexual laws discriminated against women for example marriage laws and anti birth control measures.
 the most important american free love journal was lucifer the lightbearer one eight eight three one nine zero seven edited by moses harman and lois waisbrooker but also there existed ezra heywood and angela heywood s the word one eight seven two one eight nine zero one eight nine two one eight nine three .
 free society one eight nine five one eight nine seven as the firebrand one eight nine seven one nine zero four as free society was a major anarchist newspaper in the united states at the end of the one nine th and beginning of the two zero th centuries.
 the publication advocated free love and women s rights and critiqued comstockery censorship of sexual information.
 also m.
 e.
 lazarus was an important american individualist anarchist who promoted free love.
 in new york city s greenwich village bohemian feminists and socialists advocated self realisation and pleasure for women and also men in the here and now.
 they encouraged playing with sexual roles and sexuality and the openly bisexual radical edna st.
 vincent millay and the lesbian anarchist margaret anderson were prominent among them.
 discussion groups organised by the villagers were frequented by emma goldman among others.
 magnus hirschfeld noted in one nine two three that goldman has campaigned boldly and steadfastly for individual rights and especially for those deprived of their rights.
 thus it came about that she was the first and only woman indeed the first and only american to take up the defense of homosexual love before the general public.
 in fact before goldman heterosexual anarchist robert reitzel one eight four nine one eight nine eight spoke positively of homosexuality from the beginning of the one eight nine zero s in his detroit based german language journal der arme teufel english the poor devil .
 in argentina anarcha feminist virginia bolten published the newspaper called english the woman s voice which was published nine times in rosario between eight january one eight nine six and one january one eight nine seven and was revived briefly in one nine zero one .
 in europe the main propagandist of free love within individualist anarchism was emile armand .
 he proposed the concept of la camaraderie amoureuse to speak of free love as the possibility of voluntary sexual encounter between consenting adults.
 he was also a consistent proponent of polyamory .
 in germany the stirner ists adolf brand and john henry mackay were pioneering campaigners for the acceptance of male bisexuality and homosexuality .
 mujeres libres was an anarchist women s organisation in spain that aimed to empower working class women.
 it was founded in one nine three six by luc a s nchez saornil mercedes comaposada and amparo poch y gasc n and had approximately three zero zero zero zero members.
 the organisation was based on the idea of a double struggle for women s liberation and social revolution and argued that the two objectives were equally important and should be pursued in parallel.
 in order to gain mutual support they created networks of women anarchists.
 luc a s nchez saornil was a main founder of the spanish anarcha feminist federation mujeres libres who was open about her lesbian ism.
 she was published in a variety of literary journals where working under a male pen name she was able to explore lesbian themes at a time when homosexuality was criminalized and subject to censorship and punishment.
 more recently the british anarcho pacifist alex comfort gained notoriety during the sexual revolution for writing the bestseller sex manual the joy of sex .
 the issue of free love has a dedicated treatment in the work of french anarcho hedonist philosopher michel onfray in such works as th orie du corps amoureux pour une rotique solaire two zero zero zero and l invention du plaisir fragments cyr aniques two zero zero two .
 libertarian education and freethought upright francesc ferrer i gu rdia catalan anarchist pedagogue and free thinker for english anarchist william godwin education was the main means by which change would be achieved.
 godwin saw that the main goal of education should be the promotion of happiness.
 for godwin education had to have a respect for the child s autonomy which precluded any form of coercion a pedagogy that respected this and sought to build on the child s own motivation and initiatives and a concern about the child s capacity to resist an ideology transmitted through the school.
 in his political justice he criticises state sponsored schooling on account of its obvious alliance with national government .
 publisher g.
g.
j.
 and j.
 robinson location london england year one seven nine three ref harv postscript early american anarchist josiah warren advanced alternative education experiences in the libertarian communities he established.
 max stirner wrote in one eight four two a long essay on education called the false principle of our education .
 in it stirner names his educational principle personalist explaining that self understanding consists in hourly self creation.
 education for him is to create free men sovereign characters by which he means eternal characters .
.
.
 who are therefore eternal because they form themselves each moment .
 in the united states freethought was a basically anti christian anti clerical movement whose purpose was to make the individual politically and spiritually free to decide for himself on religious matters.
 a number of contributors to liberty anarchist publication were prominent figures in both freethought and anarchism.
 the individualist anarchist george macdonald was a co editor of freethought and for a time the truth seeker .
 e.
c.
 walker was co editor of the excellent free thought free love journal lucifer the light bearer .
 many of the anarchists were ardent freethinkers reprints from freethought papers such as lucifer the light bearer freethought and the truth seeker appeared in liberty .
.
.
 the church was viewed as a common ally of the state and as a repressive force in and of itself .
 in one nine zero one catalan anarchist and free thinker francesc ferrer i gu rdia established modern or progressive schools in barcelona in defiance of an educational system controlled by the catholic church.
 the schools stated goal was to educate the working class in a rational secular and non coercive setting .
 fiercely anti clerical ferrer believed in freedom in education education free from the authority of church and state.
 murray bookchin wrote this period one eight nine zero s was the heyday of libertarian schools and pedagogical projects in all areas of the country where anarchists exercised some degree of influence.
 perhaps the best known effort in this field was francisco ferrer s modern school escuela moderna a project which exercised a considerable influence on catalan education and on experimental techniques of teaching generally.
 la escuela moderna and ferrer s ideas generally formed the inspiration for a series of modern schools in the united states cuba south america and london.
 the first of these was started in new york city in one nine one one .
 it also inspired the italian newspaper universit popolare founded in one nine zero one .
 russian christian anarchist leo tolstoy established a school for peasant children on his estate.
 tolstoy s educational experiments were short lived due to harassment by the tsarist secret police.
 tolstoy established a conceptual difference between education and culture.
 he thought that education is the tendency of one man to make another just like himself .
.
.
 education is culture under restraint culture is free.
 education is when the teaching is forced upon the pupil and when then instruction is exclusive that is when only those subjects are taught which the educator regards as necessary .
 for him without compulsion education was transformed into culture .
 a more recent libertarian tradition on education is that of unschooling and the free school in which child led activity replaces pedagogic approaches.
 experiments in germany led to a.
 s.
 neill founding what became summerhill school in one nine two one .
 summerhill is often cited as an example of anarchism in practice.
 however although summerhill and other free schools are radically libertarian they differ in principle from those of ferrer by not advocating an overtly political class struggle approach.
 in addition to organising schools according to libertarian principles anarchists have also questioned the concept of schooling per se.
 the term deschooling was popularised by ivan illich who argued that the school as an institution is dysfunctional for self determined learning and serves the creation of a consumer society instead.
 criticisms criticisms of anarchism include moral criticisms and pragmatic criticisms.
 anarchism is often evaluated as unfeasible or utopian by its critics.
 european history professor carl landauer in his book european socialism argued that social anarchism is unrealistic and that government is a lesser evil than a society without repressive force.
 he also argued that ill intentions will cease if repressive force disappears is an absurdity.
 references further reading barclay harold people without government an anthropology of anarchy two nd ed.
 left bank books one nine nine zero isbn one eight seven one zero eight two one six one blumenfeld jacob bottici chiara critchley simon eds.
 the anarchist turn pluto press.
 one nine march two zero one three .
 isbn nine seven eight zero seven four five three three three four two seven carter april the political theory of anarchism harper five five eight pages isbn nine seven eight one nine zero two five nine three nine zero six .
 volume ii ak press oakland edinburgh two zero one two five five zero pages isbn nine seven eight one eight four nine three five one two two five mclaughlin paul anarchism and authority a philosophical introduction to classical anarchism ashgate.
 two zero zero seven .
 isbn zero seven five four six six one nine six two marshall peter demanding the impossible a history of anarchism pm press.
 two zero one zero .
 isbn one six zero four eight six zero six four two nettlau max anarchy through the times gordon press.
 one nine seven nine .
 isbn zero eight four nine zero one three nine seven six scott james c.
 two cheers for anarchism six easy pieces on autonomy dignity and meaningful work and play princeton nj princeton university press two zero one two .
 isbn nine seven eight zero six nine one one five five two nine six .
 woodcock george anarchism a history of libertarian ideas and movements penguin books one nine six two .
 isbn zero one four zero two two six nine seven four .
 .
 woodcock george ed.
 the anarchist reader fontana collins one nine seven seven isbn zero zero zero six three four zero one one three an anthology of writings from anarchist thinkers and activists including proudhon kropotkin bakunin malatesta bookchin goldman and many others.
 david van deusen two zero one five the rise and fall of the green mountain anarchist collective .
 external links an anarchist faq webpage an anarchist faq anarchism a bibliography anarchist theory faq by bryan caplan anarchy archives information relating to famous anarchists including their writings see anarchy archives .
 daily bleed s anarchist encyclopedia seven zero zero entries with short biographies links and dedicated pages katesharpleylibrary.
net website of the kate sharpley library containing many historical documents pertaining to anarchism infoshop.
org an online collection of news and information about anarchism.
 the anarchist library large online library with texts from anarchist authors they lie we die anarchist virtual library containing seven six eight books booklets and texts anarchism political culture political ideologies social theories anti fascism anti capitalism far left politics for explicitly cited references.
 three reference anything you put here with notable references as this subject tends to attract a lot of controversy.
 icd nine omim two zero nine eight five zero medlineplus zero zero one five two six emedicinesubj med emedicinetopic three two zero two emedicine mult meshid d zero zero one three two one genereviewsnbk nbk one four four two genereviewsname autism overview autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impaired social interaction verbal and non verbal communication and restricted and repetitive behavior.
 parents usually notice signs in the first two years of their child s life.
 these signs often develop gradually though some children with autism reach their developmental milestones at a normal pace and then regress .
 the diagnostic criteria require that symptoms become apparent in early childhood typically before age three.
 while autism is highly heritable researchers suspect both environmental and genetic factors as causes.
 in rare cases autism is strongly associated with agents that cause birth defects .
 controversies surround other proposed environmental causes for example the vaccine hypotheses have been disproven.
 autism affects information processing in the brain by altering how nerve cell s and their synapse s connect and organize how this occurs is not well understood.
 it is one of three recognized disorders in the autism spectrum asds the other two being asperger syndrome which lacks delays in cognitive development and language and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified commonly abbreviated as pdd nos which is diagnosed when the full set of criteria for autism or asperger syndrome are not met.
 early speech or behavioral interventions can help children with autism gain self care social and communication skills.
 although there is no known cure there have been reported cases of children who recovered.
 not many children with autism live independently after reaching adulthood though some become successful.
 an autistic culture has developed with some individuals seeking a cure and others believing autism should be accepted as a difference and not treated as a disorder .
 globally autism is estimated to affect two one .
 seven million people as of two zero one three .
 as of two zero one zero the number of people affected is estimated at about one two per one zero zero zero worldwide.
 it occurs four to five times more often in boys than girls.
 about one .
 five of children in the united states one in six eight are diagnosed with asd a three zero increase from one in eight eight in two zero one two .
 the rate of autism among adults aged one eight years and over in the united kingdom is one .
 one .
 the number of people diagnosed has been increasing dramatically since the one nine eight zero s partly due to changes in diagnostic practice and government subsidized financial incentives for named diagnoses the question of whether actual rates have increased is unresolved.
 characteristics autism is a highly variable neurodevelopmental disorder that first appears during infancy or childhood and generally follows a steady course without remission .
 people with autism may be severely impaired in some respects but normal or even superior in others.
 overt symptoms gradually begin after the age of six months become established by age two or three years and tend to continue through adulthood although often in more muted form.
 it is distinguished not by a single symptom but by a characteristic triad of symptoms impairments in social interaction impairments in communication and restricted interests and repetitive behavior.
 other aspects such as atypical eating are also common but are not essential for diagnosis.
 autism s individual symptoms occur in the general population and appear not to associate highly without a sharp line separating pathologically severe from common traits.
 social development social deficits distinguish autism and the related autism spectrum disorder s asd see classification from other developmental disorders.
 people with autism have social impairments and often lack the intuition about others that many people take for granted.
 noted autistic temple grandin described her inability to understand the social communication of neurotypical s or people with normal neural development as leaving her feeling like an anthropologist on mars .
 unusual social development becomes apparent early in childhood.
 autistic infants show less attention to social stimuli smile and look at others less often and respond less to their own name.
 autistic toddlers differ more strikingly from social norms for example they have less eye contact and turn taking and do not have the ability to use simple movements to express themselves such as pointing at things.
 three to five year old children with autism are less likely to exhibit social understanding approach others spontaneously imitate and respond to emotions communicate nonverbally and take turns with others.
 however they do form attachments to their primary caregivers.
 most childen with autism display moderately less attachment security than neurotypical children although this difference disappears in children with higher mental development or less severe asd.
 older children and adults with asd perform worse on tests of face and emotion recognition although this may be partly due to a lower ability to defines a person s own emotions.
 children with high functioning autism suffer from more intense and frequent loneliness compared to non autistic peers despite the common belief that children with autism prefer to be alone.
 making and maintaining friendships often proves to be difficult for those with autism.
 for them the quality of friendships not the number of friends predicts how lonely they feel.
 functional friendships such as those resulting in invitations to parties may affect the quality of life more deeply.
 there are many anecdotal reports but few systematic studies of aggression and violence in individuals with asd.
 the limited data suggest that in children with intellectual disability autism is associated with aggression destruction of property and tantrum s.
 communication about a third to a half of individuals with autism do not develop enough natural speech to meet their daily communication needs.
 differences in communication may be present from the first year of life and may include delayed onset of babbling unusual gestures diminished responsiveness and vocal patterns that are not synchronized with the caregiver.
 in the second and third years children with autism have less frequent and less diverse babbling consonants words and word combinations their gestures are less often integrated with words.
 children with autism are less likely to make requests or share experiences and are more likely to simply repeat others words echolalia or reverse pronouns .
 joint attention seems to be necessary for functional speech and deficits in joint attention seem to distinguish infants with asd for example they may look at a pointing hand instead of the pointed at object and they consistently fail to point at objects in order to comment on or share an experience.
 children with autism may have difficulty with imaginative play and with developing symbols into language.
 in a pair of studies high functioning children with autism aged eight one five performed equally well as and adults better than individually matched controls at basic language tasks involving vocabulary and spelling.
 both autistic groups performed worse than controls at complex language tasks such as figurative language comprehension and inference.
 as people are often sized up initially from their basic language skills these studies suggest that people speaking to autistic individuals are more likely to overestimate what their audience comprehends.
 repetitive behavior autistic individuals display many forms of repetitive or restricted behavior which the repetitive behavior scale revised rbs r categorizes as follows.
 alt young boy asleep on a bed facing the camera with only the head visible and the body off camera.
 on the bed behind the boy s head is a dozen or so toys carefully arranged in a line.
 a young boy with autism who has arranged his toys in a row stereotypy is repetitive movement such as hand flapping head rolling or body rocking.
 compulsive behavior is intended and appears to follow rules such as arranging objects in stacks or lines.
 sameness is resistance to change for example insisting that the furniture not be moved or refusing to be interrupted.
 ritualistic behavior involves an unvarying pattern of daily activities such as an unchanging menu or a dressing ritual.
 this is closely associated with sameness and an independent validation has suggested combining the two factors.
 restricted behavior is limited in focus interest or activity such as preoccupation with a single television program toy or game.
 self injury includes movements that injure or can injure the person such as eye poking skin picking hand biting and head banging.
 no single repetitive or self injurious behavior seems to be specific to autism but only autism appears to have an elevated pattern of occurrence and severity of these behaviors.
 other symptoms autistic individuals may have symptoms that are independent of the diagnosis but that can affect the individual or the family.
 an estimated zero .
 five to one zero of individuals with asd show unusual abilities ranging from splinter skill s such as the memorization of trivia to the extraordinarily rare talents of prodigious autistic savants .
 many individuals with asd show superior skills in perception and attention relative to the general population.
 sensory abnormalities are found in over nine zero of those with autism and are considered core features by some although there is no good evidence that sensory symptoms differentiate autism from other developmental disorders.
 differences are greater for under responsivity for example walking into things than for over responsivity for example distress from loud noises or for sensation seeking for example rhythmic movements .
 an estimated six zero eight zero of autistic people have motor signs that include poor muscle tone poor motor planning and toe walking deficits in motor coordination are pervasive across asd and are greater in autism proper.
 unusual eating behavior occurs in about three quarters of children with asd to the extent that it was formerly a diagnostic indicator.
 selectivity is the most common problem although eating rituals and food refusal also occur this does not appear to result in malnutrition .
 although some children with autism also have gastrointestinal symptom s there is a lack of published rigorous data to support the theory that children with autism have more or different gastrointestinal symptoms than usual studies report conflicting results and the relationship between gastrointestinal problems and asd is unclear.
 parents of children with asd have higher levels of stress .
 siblings of children with asd report greater admiration of and less conflict with the affected sibling than siblings of unaffected children and were similar to siblings of children with down syndrome in these aspects of the sibling relationship.
 however they reported lower levels of closeness and intimacy than siblings of children with down syndrome siblings of individuals with asd have greater risk of negative well being and poorer sibling relationships as adults.
 causes it has long been presumed that there is a common cause at the genetic cognitive and neural levels for autism s characteristic triad of symptoms.
 however there is increasing suspicion that autism is instead a complex disorder whose core aspects have distinct causes that often co occur.
 alt three diagrams of chromosome pairs a b that are nearly identical.
 one b is missing a segment of a.
 two b has two adjacent copies of a segment of a.
 three b s copy of a s segment is in reverse order.
 deletion one duplication two and inversion three are all chromosome abnormalities that have been implicated in autism.
 autism has a strong genetic basis although the genetics of autism are complex and it is unclear whether asd is explained more by rare mutation s with major effects or by rare multigene interactions of common genetic variants.
 complexity arises due to interactions among multiple genes the environment and epigenetic factors which do not change dna but are heritable and influence gene expression .
 studies of twins suggest that heritability is zero .
 seven for autism and as high as zero .
 nine for asd and siblings of those with autism are about two five times more likely to be autistic than the general population.
 however most of the mutations that increase autism risk have not been identified.
 typically autism cannot be traced to a mendelian single gene mutation or to a single chromosome abnormality and none of the genetic syndromes associated with asds have been shown to selectively cause asd.
 numerous candidate genes have been located with only small effects attributable to any particular gene.
 the large number of autistic individuals with unaffected family members may result from copy number variation s spontaneous deletions or duplications in genetic material during meiosis .
 hence a substantial fraction of autism cases may be traceable to genetic causes that are highly heritable but not inherited that is the mutation that causes the autism is not present in the parental genome.
 several lines of evidence point to synaptic dysfunction as a cause of autism.
 some rare mutations may lead to autism by disrupting some synaptic pathways such as those involved with cell adhesion .
 gene replacement studies in mice suggest that autistic symptoms are closely related to later developmental steps that depend on activity in synapses and on activity dependent changes.
 all known teratogen s agents that cause birth defect s related to the risk of autism appear to act during the first eight weeks from conception and though this does not exclude the possibility that autism can be initiated or affected later there is strong evidence that autism arises very early in development.
 exposure to air pollution during pregnancy especially heavy metals and particulates may increase the risk of autism.
 environmental factor s that have been claimed to contribute to or exacerbate autism or may be important in future research include certain foods infectious disease s solvent s diesel exhaust pcbs phthalates and phenols used in plastic products pesticide s brominated flame retardant s alcohol smoking illicit drug s vaccine s and prenatal stress although no links have been found and some have been completely disproven.
 parents may first become aware of autistic symptoms in their child around the time of a routine vaccination.
 this has led to unsupported theories blaming vaccine overload a vaccine preservative or the mmr vaccine for causing autism.
 the latter theory was supported by a litigation funded study that has since been shown to have been an elaborate fraud .
 although these theories lack convincing scientific evidence and are biologically implausible parental concern about a potential vaccine link with autism has led to lower rates of childhood immunizations outbreaks of previously controlled childhood diseases in some countries and the preventable deaths of several children.
 mechanism autism s symptoms result from maturation related changes in various systems of the brain.
 how autism occurs is not well understood.
 its mechanism can be divided into two areas the pathophysiology of brain structures and processes associated with autism and the neuropsychological linkages between brain structures and behaviors.
 the behaviors appear to have multiple pathophysiologies.
 pathophysiology alt two diagrams of major brain structures implicated in autism.
 the upper diagram shows the cerebral cortex near the top and the basal ganglia in the center just above the amygdala and hippocampus.
 the lower diagram shows the corpus callosum near the center the cerebellum in the lower rear and the brain stem in the lower center.
 autism affects the amygdala cerebellum and many other parts of the brain.
 unlike many other brain disorders such as parkinson s autism does not have a clear unifying mechanism at either the molecular cellular or systems level it is not known whether autism is a few disorders caused by mutations converging on a few common molecular pathways or is like intellectual disability a large set of disorders with diverse mechanisms.
 autism appears to result from developmental factors that affect many or all functional brain systems and to disturb the timing of brain development more than the final product.
 neuroanatomical studies and the associations with teratogens strongly suggest that autism s mechanism includes alteration of brain development soon after conception.
 this anomaly appears to start a cascade of pathological events in the brain that are significantly influenced by environmental factors.
 just after birth the brains of children with autism tend to grow faster than usual followed by normal or relatively slower growth in childhood.
 it is not known whether early overgrowth occurs in all children with autism.
 it seems to be most prominent in brain areas underlying the development of higher cognitive specialization.
 hypotheses for the cellular and molecular bases of pathological early overgrowth include the following an excess of neuron s that causes local overconnectivity in key brain regions.
 disturbed neuronal migration during early gestation .
 unbalanced excitatory inhibitory networks.
 abnormal formation of synapse s and dendritic spine s for example by modulation of the neurexin neuroligin cell adhesion system or by poorly regulated synthesis of synaptic proteins.
 disrupted synaptic development may also contribute to epilepsy which may explain why the two conditions are associated.
 the immune system is thought to play an important role in autism.
 children with autism have been found by researchers to have inflammation of both the peripheral and central immune systems as indicated by increased levels of pro inflammatory cytokines and significant activation of microglia .
 biomarkers of abnormal immune function have also been associated with increased impairments in behaviors that are characteristic of the core features of autism such as deficits in social interactions and communication.
 interactions between the immune system and the nervous system begin early during the embryonic stage of life and successful neurodevelopment depends on a balanced immune response.
 it is thought that activation of a pregnant mother s immune system such as from environmental toxicants or infection can contribute to causing autism through causing a disruption of brain development.
 this is supported by recent studies that have found that infection during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of autism.
 the relationship of neurochemical s to autism is not well understood several have been investigated with the most evidence for the role of serotonin and of genetic differences in its transport.
 the role of group i metabotropic glutamate receptors mglur in the pathogenesis of fragile x syndrome the most common identified genetic cause of autism has led to interest in the possible implications for future autism research into this pathway.
 some data suggests neuronal overgrowth potentially related to an increase in several growth hormone s or to impaired regulation of growth factor receptor s.
 also some inborn errors of metabolism are associated with autism but probably account for less than five of cases.
 the mirror neuron system mns theory of autism hypothesizes that distortion in the development of the mns interferes with imitation and leads to autism s core features of social impairment and communication difficulties.
 the mns operates when an animal performs an action or observes another animal perform the same action.
 the mns may contribute to an individual s understanding of other people by enabling the modeling of their behavior via embodied simulation of their actions intentions and emotions.
 several studies have tested this hypothesis by demonstrating structural abnormalities in mns regions of individuals with asd delay in the activation in the core circuit for imitation in individuals with asperger syndrome and a correlation between reduced mns activity and severity of the syndrome in children with asd.
 however individuals with autism also have abnormal brain activation in many circuits outside the mns and the mns theory does not explain the normal performance of children with autism on imitation tasks that involve a goal or object.
 upright alt a human brain viewed from above.
 about one zero is highlighted in yellow and one zero in blue.
 there is only a tiny perhaps zero .
 five green region where they overlap.
 autistic individuals tend to use different areas of the brain yellow for a movement task compared to a control group blue .
 asd related patterns of low function and aberrant activation in the brain differ depending on whether the brain is doing social or nonsocial tasks.
 in autism there is evidence for reduced functional connectivity of the default network a large scale brain network involved in social and emotional processing with intact connectivity of the task positive network used in sustained attention and goal directed thinking .
 in people with autism the two networks are not negatively correlated in time suggesting an imbalance in toggling between the two networks possibly reflecting a disturbance of self referential thought.
 the underconnectivity theory of autism hypothesizes that autism is marked by underfunctioning high level neural connections and synchronization along with an excess of low level processes.
 evidence for this theory has been found in functional neuroimaging studies on autistic individuals and by a brainwave study that suggested that adults with asd have local overconnectivity in the cortex and weak functional connections between the frontal lobe and the rest of the cortex.
 other evidence suggests the underconnectivity is mainly within each hemisphere of the cortex and that autism is a disorder of the association cortex .
 from studies based on event related potential s transient changes to the brain s electrical activity in response to stimuli there is considerable evidence for differences in autistic individuals with respect to attention orientation to auditory and visual stimuli novelty detection language and face processing and information storage several studies have found a preference for nonsocial stimuli.
 for example magnetoencephalography studies have found evidence in children with autism of delayed responses in the brain s processing of auditory signals.
 in the genetic area relations have been found between autism and schizophrenia based on duplications and deletions of chromosomes research showed that schizophrenia and autism are significantly more common in combination with one q two one .
 one deletion syndrome .
 research on autism schizophrenia relations for chromosome one five one five q one three .
 three chromosome one six one six p one three .
 one and chromosome one seven one seven p one two are inconclusive.
 neuropsychology two major categories of cognitive theories have been proposed about the links between autistic brains and behavior.
 the first category focuses on deficits in social cognition .
 simon baron cohen s empathizing systemizing theory postulates that autistic individuals can systemize that is they can develop internal rules of operation to handle events inside the brain but are less effective at empathizing by handling events generated by other agents.
 an extension the extreme male brain theory hypothesizes that autism is an extreme case of the male brain defined psychometrically as individuals in whom systemizing is better than empathizing.
 these theories are somewhat related to baron cohen s earlier theory of mind approach which hypothesizes that autistic behavior arises from an inability to ascribe mental states to oneself and others.
 the theory of mind hypothesis is supported by the atypical responses of children with autism to the sally anne test for reasoning about others motivations and the mirror neuron system theory of autism described in pathophysiology maps well to the hypothesis.
 however most studies have found no evidence of impairment in autistic individuals ability to understand other people s basic intentions or goals instead data suggests that impairments are found in understanding more complex social emotions or in considering others viewpoints.
 the second category focuses on nonsocial or general processing the executive functions such as working memory planning inhibition .
 in his review kenworthy states that the claim of executive dysfunction as a causal factor in autism is controversial however it is clear that executive dysfunction plays a role in the social and cognitive deficits observed in individuals with autism .
 tests of core executive processes such as eye movement tasks indicate improvement from late childhood to adolescence but performance never reaches typical adult levels.
 a strength of the theory is predicting stereotyped behavior and narrow interests two weaknesses are that executive function is hard to measure and that executive function deficits have not been found in young children with autism.
 weak central coherence theory hypothesizes that a limited ability to see the big picture underlies the central disturbance in autism.
 one strength of this theory is predicting special talents and peaks in performance in autistic people.
 a related theory enhanced perceptual functioning focuses more on the superiority of locally oriented and perceptual operations in autistic individuals.
 these theories map well from the underconnectivity theory of autism.
 neither category is satisfactory on its own social cognition theories poorly address autism s rigid and repetitive behaviors while the nonsocial theories have difficulty explaining social impairment and communication difficulties.
 a combined theory based on multiple deficits may prove to be more useful.
 diagnosis diagnosis is based on behavior not cause or mechanism.
 under the dsm five autism is characterized by persistent deficits in social communication and interaction across multiple contexts as well as restricted repetitive patterns of behavior interests or activities.
 these deficits are present in early childhood typically before age three and lead to clinically significant functional impairment.
 sample symptoms include lack of social or emotional reciprocity stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language and persistent preoccupation with unusual objects.
 the disturbance must not be better accounted for by rett syndrome intellectual disability or global developmental delay.
 icd one zero uses essentially the same definition.
 several diagnostic instruments are available.
 two are commonly used in autism research the autism diagnostic interview revised adi r is a semistructured parent interview and the autism diagnostic observation schedule ados uses observation and interaction with the child.
 the childhood autism rating scale cars is used widely in clinical environments to assess severity of autism based on observation of children.
 a pediatrician commonly performs a preliminary investigation by taking developmental history and physically examining the child.
 if warranted diagnosis and evaluations are conducted with help from asd specialists observing and assessing cognitive communication family and other factors using standardized tools and taking into account any associated medical conditions .
 a pediatric neuropsychologist is often asked to assess behavior and cognitive skills both to aid diagnosis and to help recommend educational interventions.
 a differential diagnosis for asd at this stage might also consider intellectual disability hearing impairment and a specific language impairment such as landau kleffner syndrome .
 the presence of autism can make it harder to diagnose coexisting psychiatric disorders such as depression .
 clinical genetics evaluations are often done once asd is diagnosed particularly when other symptoms already suggest a genetic cause.
 although genetic technology allows clinical geneticists to link an estimated four zero of cases to genetic causes consensus guidelines in the us and uk are limited to high resolution chromosome and fragile x testing.
 a genotype first model of diagnosis has been proposed which would routinely assess the genome s copy number variations.
 as new genetic tests are developed several ethical legal and social issues will emerge.
 commercial availability of tests may precede adequate understanding of how to use test results given the complexity of autism s genetics.
 metabolic and neuroimaging tests are sometimes helpful but are not routine.
 asd can sometimes be diagnosed by age one four months although diagnosis becomes increasingly stable over the first three years of life for example a one year old who meets diagnostic criteria for asd is less likely than a three year old to continue to do so a few years later.
 in the uk the national autism plan for children recommends at most three zero weeks from first concern to completed diagnosis and assessment though few cases are handled that quickly in practice.
 although the symptoms of autism and asd begin early in childhood they are sometimes missed years later adults may seek diagnoses to help them or their friends and family understand themselves to help their employers make adjustments or in some locations to claim disability living allowances or other benefits.
 underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis are problems in marginal cases and much of the recent increase in the number of reported asd cases is likely due to changes in diagnostic practices.
 the increasing popularity of drug treatment options and the expansion of benefits has given providers incentives to diagnose asd resulting in some overdiagnosis of children with uncertain symptoms.
 conversely the cost of screening and diagnosis and the challenge of obtaining payment can inhibit or delay diagnosis.
 it is particularly hard to diagnose autism among the visually impaired partly because some of its diagnostic criteria depend on vision and partly because autistic symptoms overlap with those of common blindness syndromes or blindism s.
 classification autism is one of the five pervasive developmental disorder s pdd which are characterized by widespread abnormalities of social interactions and communication and severely restricted interests and highly repetitive behavior.
 these symptoms do not imply sickness fragility or emotional disturbance.
 of the five pdd forms asperger syndrome is closest to autism in signs and likely causes rett syndrome and childhood disintegrative disorder share several signs with autism but may have unrelated causes pdd not otherwise specified pdd nos also called atypical autism is diagnosed when the criteria are not met for a more specific disorder.
 unlike with autism people with asperger syndrome have no substantial delay in language development .
 the terminology of autism can be bewildering with autism asperger syndrome and pdd nos often called the autism spectrum disorders asd or sometimes the autistic disorders whereas autism itself is often called autistic disorder childhood autism or infantile autism .
 in this article autism refers to the classic autistic disorder in clinical practice though autism asd and pdd are often used interchangeably.
 asd in turn is a subset of the broader autism phenotype which describes individuals who may not have asd but do have autistic like traits such as avoiding eye contact.
 the manifestations of autism cover a wide spectrum ranging from individuals with severe impairments who may be silent developmentally disabled and locked into hand flapping and rocking to high functioning individuals who may have active but distinctly odd social approaches narrowly focused interests and verbose pedantic communication.
 because the behavior spectrum is continuous boundaries between diagnostic categories are necessarily somewhat arbitrary.
 sometimes the syndrome is divided into low medium or high functioning autism lfa mfa and hfa based on iq thresholds or on how much support the individual requires in daily life these subdivisions are not standardized and are controversial.
 autism can also be divided into syndromal and non syndromal autism the syndromal autism is associated with severe or profound intellectual disability or a congenital syndrome with physical symptoms such as tuberous sclerosis .
 although individuals with asperger syndrome tend to perform better cognitively than those with autism the extent of the overlap between asperger syndrome hfa and non syndromal autism is unclear.
 some studies have reported diagnoses of autism in children due to a loss of language or social skills as opposed to a failure to make progress typically from one five to three zero months of age.
 the validity of this distinction remains controversial it is possible that regressive autism is a specific subtype or that there is a continuum of behaviors between autism with and without regression.
 research into causes has been hampered by the inability to identify biologically meaningful subgroups within the autistic population and by the traditional boundaries between the disciplines of psychiatry psychology neurology and pediatrics .
 newer technologies such as fmri and diffusion tensor imaging can help identify biologically relevant phenotype s observable traits that can be viewed on brain scan s to help further neurogenetic studies of autism one example is lowered activity in the fusiform face area of the brain which is associated with impaired perception of people versus objects.
 it has been proposed to classify autism using genetics as well as behavior.
 screening about half of parents of children with asd notice their child s unusual behaviors by age one eight months and about four fifths notice by age two four months.
 according to an article in the journal of autism and developmental disorders failure to meet any of the following milestones is an absolute indication to proceed with further evaluations.
 delay in referral for such testing may delay early diagnosis and treatment and affect the long term outcome .
 no babbling by one two months.
 no gesturing pointing waving etc.
 by one two months.
 no single words by one six months.
 no two word spontaneous not just echolalic phrases by two four months.
 any loss of any language or social skills at any age.
 us and japanese practice is to screen all children for asd at one eight and two four months using autism specific formal screening tests.
 in contrast in the uk children whose families or doctors recognize possible signs of autism are screened.
 it is not known which approach is more effective.
 screening tools include the modified checklist for autism in toddlers m chat the early screening of autistic traits questionnaire and the first year inventory initial data on m chat and its predecessor the checklist for autism in toddlers chat on children aged one eight three zero months suggests that it is best used in a clinical setting and that it has low sensitivity many false negatives but good specificity few false positives .
 it may be more accurate to precede these tests with a broadband screener that does not distinguish asd from other developmental disorders.
 screening tools designed for one culture s norms for behaviors like eye contact may be inappropriate for a different culture.
 although genetic screening for autism is generally still impractical it can be considered in some cases such as children with neurological symptoms and dysmorphic feature s.
 prevention infection with rubella during pregnancy causes fewer than one of cases of autism vaccination against rubella can prevent many of those cases.
 management alt a young child points in front of a woman who smiles and points in the same direction.
 a three year old with autism points to fish in an aquarium as part of an experiment on the effect of intensive shared attention training on language development.
 the main goals when treating children with autism are to lessen associated deficits and family distress and to increase quality of life and functional independence.
 in general higher iqs are correlated with greater responsiveness to treatment and improved treatment outcomes.
 no single treatment is best and treatment is typically tailored to the child s needs.
 families and the educational system are the main resources for treatment.
 studies of interventions have methodological problems that prevent definitive conclusions about efficacy however the development of evidence based interventions has advanced in recent years.
 although many psychosocial interventions have some positive evidence suggesting that some form of treatment is preferable to no treatment the methodological quality of systematic review s of these studies has generally been poor their clinical results are mostly tentative and there is little evidence for the relative effectiveness of treatment options.
 intensive sustained special education programs and behavior therapy early in life can help children acquire self care social and job skills and often improve functioning and decrease symptom severity and maladaptive behaviors claims that intervention by around age three years is crucial are not substantiated.
 available approaches include applied behavior analysis aba developmental models structured teaching speech and language therapy social skills therapy and occupational therapy .
 among these approaches interventions either treat autistic features comprehensively or focalize treatment on a specific area of deficit.
 there is some evidence that early intensive behavioral intervention eibi an early intervention model based on aba for two zero to four zero hours a week for multiple years is an effective treatment for some children with asd.
 two theoretical frameworks outlined for early childhood intervention include applied behavioral analysis aba and developmental social pragmatic models dsp .
 one interventional strategy utilizes a parent training model which teaches parents how to implement various aba and dsp techniques allowing for parents to disseminate interventions themselves.
 various dsp programs have been developed to explicitly deliver intervention systems through at home parent implementation.
 despite the recent development of parent training models these interventions have demonstrated effectiveness in numerous studies being evaluated as a probable efficacious mode of treatment.
 education educational interventions can be effective to varying degrees in most children intensive aba treatment has demonstrated effectiveness in enhancing global functioning in preschool children and is well established for improving intellectual performance of young children.
 similarly teacher implemented intervention that utilizes an aba combined with a developmental social pragmatic approach has been found to be a well established treatment in improving social communication skills in young children although there is less evidence in its treatment of global symptoms.
 neuropsychological reports are often poorly communicated to educators resulting in a gap between what a report recommends and what education is provided.
 it is not known whether treatment programs for children lead to significant improvements after the children grow up and the limited research on the effectiveness of adult residential programs shows mixed results.
 the appropriateness of including children with varying severity of autism spectrum disorders in the general education population is a subject of current debate among educators and researchers.
 medication many medications are used to treat asd symptoms that interfere with integrating a child into home or school when behavioral treatment fails.
 more than half of us children diagnosed with asd are prescribed psychoactive drug s or anticonvulsant s with the most common drug classes being antidepressant s stimulant s and antipsychotic s.
 antipsychotics such as risperidone and aripiprazole have been found to be useful for treating irritability repetitive behavior and sleeplessness that often occurs with autism.
 there is scant reliable research about the effectiveness or safety of drug treatments for adolescents and adults with asd.
 a person with asd may respond atypically to medications the medications can have adverse effects and no known medication relieves autism s core symptoms of social and communication impairments.
 experiments in mice have reversed or reduced some symptoms related to autism by replacing or modulating gene function suggesting the possibility of targeting therapies to specific rare mutations known to cause autism.
 alternative medicine although many alternative therapies and interventions are available few are supported by scientific studies.
 treatment approaches have little empirical support in quality of life contexts and many programs focus on success measures that lack predictive validity and real world relevance.
 scientific evidence appears to matter less to service providers than program marketing training availability and parent requests.
 some alternative treatments may place the child at risk.
 a two zero zero eight study found that compared to their peers autistic boys have significantly thinner bones if on casein free diet s in two zero zero five botched chelation therapy killed a five year old child with autism.
 there has been early research looking at hyperbaric treatment s in children with autism.
 although popularly used as an alternative treatment for people with autism there is no good evidence that a gluten free diet is of benefit.
 in the subset of people who have gluten sensitivity there is limited evidence that suggests that a gluten free diet may improve some autistic behaviours.
 cost treatment is expensive indirect costs are more so.
 for someone born in two zero zero zero a us study estimated an average lifetime cost of net present value in dollars inflation adjusted from two zero zero three estimate with about one zero medical care three zero extra education and other care and six zero lost economic productivity.
 publicly supported programs are often inadequate or inappropriate for a given child and unreimbursed out of pocket medical or therapy expenses are associated with likelihood of family financial problems one two zero zero eight us study found a one four average loss of annual income in families of children with asd and a related study found that asd is associated with higher probability that child care problems will greatly affect parental employment.
 us states increasingly require private health insurance to cover autism services shifting costs from publicly funded education programs to privately funded health insurance.
 after childhood key treatment issues include residential care job training and placement sexuality social skills and estate planning .
 society and culture the rainbow colored infinity is often used as a symbol for the diversity of the autism spectrum as well as neurodiversity in general.
 the emergence of the autism rights movement has served as an attempt to encourage people to be more tolerant of those with autism.
 through this movement people hope to cause others to think of autism as a difference instead of a disease.
 proponents of this movement wish to seek acceptance not cures.
 there have also been many worldwide events promoting autism awareness such as world autism awareness day light it up blue autism sunday autistic pride day autreat and others.
 there have also been many organizations dedicated to increasing the awareness of autism and the effects that autism has on someone s life.
 these organizations include autism speaks autism national committee autism society of america and many others.
 social science scholars have had an increased focused on studying those with autism in hopes to learn more about autism as a culture transcultural comparisons and research on social movements.
 media has had an influence on how the public perceives those with autism.
 rain man a film that won four oscars depicts a character with autism who has incredible talents and abilities.
 while many autistics don t have these special abilities there are some autistic individuals who have been successful in their fields.
 prognosis there is no known cure.
 children recover occasionally so that they lose their diagnosis of asd this occurs sometimes after intensive treatment and sometimes not.
 it is not known how often recovery happens reported rates in unselected samples of children with asd have ranged from three to two five .
 most children with autism acquire language by age five or younger though a few have developed communication skills in later years.
 most children with autism lack social support meaningful relationships future employment opportunities or self determination .
 although core difficulties tend to persist symptoms often become less severe with age.
 few high quality studies address long term prognosis .
 some adults show modest improvement in communication skills but a few decline no study has focused on autism after midlife.
 acquiring language before age six having an iq above five zero and having a marketable skill all predict better outcomes independent living is unlikely with severe autism.
 most people with autism face significant obstacles in transitioning to adulthood.
 epidemiology alt bar chart versus time.
 the graph rises steadily from one nine nine six to two zero zero seven from about zero .
 seven to about five .
 three .
 the trend curves slightly upward.
 reports of autism cases per one zero zero zero children grew dramatically in the us from one nine nine six to two zero zero seven .
 it is unknown how much if any growth came from changes in rates of autism.
 most recent review s tend to estimate a prevalence of one two per one zero zero zero for autism and close to six per one zero zero zero for asd and one one per one zero zero zero children in the united states for asd as of two zero zero eight because of inadequate data these numbers may underestimate asd s true rate.
 globally autism affects an estimated two one .
 seven million people as of two zero one three while asperger syndrome affects a further three one .
 one million.
 in two zero one two the nhs estimated that the overall prevalence of autism among adults aged one eight years and over in the uk was one .
 one .
 rates of pdd nos s has been estimated at three .
 seven per one zero zero zero asperger syndrome at roughly zero .
 six per one zero zero zero and childhood disintegrative disorder at zero .
 zero two per one zero zero zero .
 cdc s most recent estimate is that one out of every six eight children or one four .
 seven per one zero zero zero has an asd as of two zero one zero .
 cdc home autism spectrum disorder asd ncbddd the number of reported cases of autism increased dramatically in the one nine nine zero s and early two zero zero zero s.
 this increase is largely attributable to changes in diagnostic practices referral patterns availability of services age at diagnosis and public awareness though unidentified environmental risk factors cannot be ruled out.
 the available evidence does not rule out the possibility that autism s true prevalence has increased a real increase would suggest directing more attention and funding toward changing environmental factors instead of continuing to focus on genetics.
 boys are at higher risk for asd than girls.
 the sex ratio averages four .
 three one and is greatly modified by cognitive impairment it may be close to two one with intellectual disability and more than five .
 five one without.
 several theories about the higher prevalence in males have been investigated but the cause of the difference is unconfirmed one theory is that females are underdiagnosed.
 although the evidence does not implicate any single pregnancy related risk factor as a cause of autism the risk of autism is associated with advanced age in either parent and with diabetes bleeding and use of psychiatric drugs in the mother during pregnancy.
 the risk is greater with older fathers than with older mothers two potential explanations are the known increase in mutation burden in older sperm and the hypothesis that men marry later if they carry genetic liability and show some signs of autism.
 most professionals believe that race ethnicity and socioeconomic background do not affect the occurrence of autism.
 several other conditions are common in children with autism.
 they include genetic disorder s .
 about one zero one five of autism cases have an identifiable mendelian single gene condition chromosome abnormality or other genetic syndrome and asd is associated with several genetic disorders.
 intellectual disability .
 the percentage of autistic individuals who also meet criteria for intellectual disability has been reported as anywhere from two five to seven zero a wide variation illustrating the difficulty of assessing autistic intelligence.
 in comparison for pdd nos the association with intellectual disability is much weaker and by definition the diagnosis of asperger s excludes intellectual disability.
 anxiety disorder s are common among children with asd there are no firm data but studies have reported prevalences ranging from one one to eight four .
 many anxiety disorders have symptoms that are better explained by asd itself or are hard to distinguish from asd s symptoms.
 epilepsy with variations in risk of epilepsy due to age cognitive level and type of language disorder .
 several metabolic defect s such as phenylketonuria are associated with autistic symptoms.
 minor physical anomalies are significantly increased in the autistic population.
 preempted diagnoses .
 although the dsm iv rules out concurrent diagnosis of many other conditions along with autism the full criteria for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder adhd tourette syndrome and other of these conditions are often present and these comorbid diagnoses are increasingly accepted.
 sleep problems affect about two thirds of individuals with asd at some point in childhood.
 these most commonly include symptoms of insomnia such as difficulty in falling asleep frequent nocturnal awakenings and early morning awakenings.
 sleep problems are associated with difficult behaviors and family stress and are often a focus of clinical attention over and above the primary asd diagnosis.
 history upright alt head and shoulders of a man in his early six zero s in coat and tie facing slightly to his right.
 he is balding and has a serious but slightly smiling expression.
 leo kanner introduced the label early infantile autism in one nine four three .
 a few examples of autistic symptoms and treatments were described long before autism was named.
 the table talk of martin luther compiled by his notetaker mathesius contains the story of a one two year old boy who may have been severely autistic.
 luther reportedly thought the boy was a soulless mass of flesh possessed by the devil and suggested that he be suffocated although a later critic has cast doubt on the veracity of this report.
 the earliest well documented case of autism is that of hugh blair of borgue as detailed in a one seven four seven court case in which his brother successfully petitioned to annul blair s marriage to gain blair s inheritance.
 the wild boy of aveyron a feral child caught in one seven nine eight showed several signs of autism the medical student jean itard treated him with a behavioral program designed to help him form social attachments and to induce speech via imitation.
 the new latin word autismus english translation autism was coined by the swiss psychiatrist eugen bleuler in one nine one zero as he was defining symptoms of schizophrenia .
 he derived it from the greek word aut s meaning self and used it to mean morbid self admiration referring to autistic withdrawal of the patient to his fantasies against which any influence from outside becomes an intolerable disturbance .
 the word autism first took its modern sense in one nine three eight when hans asperger of the vienna university hospital adopted bleuler s terminology autistic psychopaths in a lecture in german about child psychology .
 asperger was investigating an asd now known as asperger syndrome though for various reasons it was not widely recognized as a separate diagnosis until one nine eight one .
 leo kanner of the johns hopkins hospital first used autism in its modern sense in english when he introduced the label early infantile autism in a one nine four three report of one one children with striking behavioral similarities.
 almost all the characteristics described in kanner s first paper on the subject notably autistic aloneness and insistence on sameness are still regarded as typical of the autistic spectrum of disorders.
 it is not known whether kanner derived the term independently of asperger.
 kanner s reuse of autism led to decades of confused terminology like infantile schizophrenia and child psychiatry s focus on maternal deprivation led to misconceptions of autism as an infant s response to refrigerator mother s .
 starting in the late one nine six zero s autism was established as a separate syndrome by demonstrating that it is lifelong distinguishing it from intellectual disability and schizophrenia and from other developmental disorders and demonstrating the benefits of involving parents in active programs of therapy.
 as late as the mid one nine seven zero s there was little evidence of a genetic role in autism now it is thought to be one of the most heritable of all psychiatric conditions.
 although the rise of parent organizations and the destigmatization of childhood asd have deeply affected how we view asd parents continue to feel social stigma in situations where their child s autistic behavior is perceived negatively by others and many primary care physician s and medical specialist s still express some beliefs consistent with outdated autism research.
 the internet has helped autistic individuals bypass nonverbal cues and emotional sharing that they find so hard to deal with and has given them a way to form online communities and work remotely.
 sociological and cultural aspects of autism have developed some in the community seek a cure while others believe that autism is simply another way of being .
 references further reading external links autism communication disorders mental and behavioural disorders neurological disorders neurological disorders in children pervasive developmental disorders psychiatric diagnosis percentage of diffusely reflected sunlight in relation to various surface conditions albedo or reflection coefficient derived from latin albedo whiteness or reflected sunlight in turn from albus white is the diffuse reflectivity or reflecting power of a surface.
 it is the ratio of reflected radiation from the surface to incident radiation upon it.
 its dimensionless nature lets it be expressed as a percentage and is measured on a scale from zero for no reflection of a perfectly black surface to one for perfect reflection of a white surface.
 note since it is the ratio of all reflected radiation to incident radiation it will include the diffuse and the specular radiation reflected.
 it is however common to assume a surface reflects in either a totally specular manner or a totally diffuse manner as this can simplify calculations.
 albedo depends on the frequency of the radiation.
 when quoted unqualified it usually refers to some appropriate average across the spectrum of visible light .
 in general the albedo depends on the directional distribution of incident radiation except for lambertian surfaces which scatter radiation in all directions according to a cosine function and therefore have an albedo that is independent of the incident distribution.
 in practice a bidirectional reflectance distribution function brdf may be required to accurately characterize the scattering properties of a surface but albedo is very useful as a first approximation.
 the albedo is an important concept in climatology astronomy and calculating reflectivity of surfaces in leed sustainable rating systems for buildings.
 the average overall albedo of earth its planetary albedo is three zero to three five because of cloud cover but widely varies locally across the surface because of different geological and environmental features.
 the term was introduced into optics by johann heinrich lambert in his one seven six zero work photometria .
 terrestrial albedo albedos of typical materials in visible light range from up to zero .
 nine for fresh snow to about zero .
 zero four for charcoal one of the darkest substances.
 deeply shadowed cavities can achieve an effective albedo approaching the zero of a black body .
 when seen from a distance the ocean surface has a low albedo as do most forests whereas desert areas have some of the highest albedos among landforms.
 most land areas are in an albedo range of zero .
 one to zero .
 four .
 the average albedo of earth is about zero .
 three .
 this is far higher than for the ocean primarily because of the contribution of clouds.
 two zero zero three two zero zero four mean annual clear sky and total sky albedo earth s surface albedo is regularly estimated via earth observation satellite sensors such as nasa s modis instruments on board the terra and aqua satellites.
 as the total amount of reflected radiation cannot be directly measured by satellite a mathematical model of the brdf is used to translate a sample set of satellite reflectance measurements into estimates of directional hemispherical reflectance and bi hemispherical reflectance e.
g.
 .
 earth s average surface temperature due to its albedo and the greenhouse effect is currently about one five c.
 if earth were frozen entirely and hence be more reflective the average temperature of the planet would drop below four zero c.
 if only the continental land masses became covered by glaciers the mean temperature of the planet would drop to about zero c.
 in contrast if the entire earth is covered by water a so called aquaplanet the average temperature on the planet would rise to just under two seven c.
 white sky and black sky albedo it has been shown that for many applications involving terrestrial albedo the albedo at a particular solar zenith angle i can reasonably be approximated by the proportionate sum of two terms the directional hemispherical reflectance at that solar zenith angle and the bi hemispherical reflectance bar the proportion concerned being defined as the proportion of diffuse illumination .
 albedo can then be given as one d bar alpha theta i d bar .
 directional hemispherical reflectance is sometimes referred to as black sky albedo and bi hemispherical reflectance as white sky albedo.
 these terms are important because they allow the albedo to be calculated for any given illumination conditions from a knowledge of the intrinsic properties of the surface.
 astronomical albedo the albedos of planet s satellites and asteroid s can be used to infer much about their properties.
 the study of albedos their dependence on wavelength lighting angle phase angle and variation in time comprises a major part of the astronomical field of photometry .
 for small and far objects that cannot be resolved by telescopes much of what we know comes from the study of their albedos.
 for example the absolute albedo can indicate the surface ice content of outer solar system objects the variation of albedo with phase angle gives information about regolith properties whereas unusually high radar albedo is indicative of high metal content in asteroid s.
 enceladus a moon of saturn has one of the highest known albedos of any body in the solar system with nine nine of em radiation reflected.
 another notable high albedo body is eris with an albedo of zero .
 nine six .
 many small objects in the outer solar system and asteroid belt have low albedos down to about zero .
 zero five .
 a typical comet nucleus has an albedo of zero .
 zero four .
 such a dark surface is thought to be indicative of a primitive and heavily space weathered surface containing some organic compound s.
 the overall albedo of the moon is around zero .
 one two but it is strongly directional and non lambertian displaying also a strong opposition effect .
 although such reflectance properties are different from those of any terrestrial terrains they are typical of the regolith surfaces of airless solar system bodies.
 two common albedos that are used in astronomy are the v band geometric albedo measuring brightness when illumination comes from directly behind the observer and the bond albedo measuring total proportion of electromagnetic energy reflected .
 their values can differ significantly which is a common source of confusion.
 in detailed studies the directional reflectance properties of astronomical bodies are often expressed in terms of the five hapke parameters which semi empirically describe the variation of albedo with phase angle including a characterization of the opposition effect of regolith surfaces.
 the correlation between astronomical geometric albedo absolute magnitude and diameter is a left frac right two where a is the astronomical albedo d is the diameter in kilometers and h is the absolute magnitude.
 examples of terrestrial albedo effects illumination although the albedo temperature effect is best known in colder whiter regions on earth the maximum albedo is actually found in the tropics where year round illumination is greater.
 the maximum is additionally in the northern hemisphere varying between three and twelve degrees north.
 the minima are found in the subtropical regions of the northern and southern hemispheres beyond which albedo increases without respect to illumination.
 insolation effects the intensity of albedo temperature effects depend on the amount of albedo and the level of local insolation solar irradiance high albedo areas in the arctic and antarctic regions are cold due to low insolation where areas such as the sahara desert which also have a relatively high albedo will be hotter due to high insolation.
 tropical and sub tropical rain forest areas have low albedo and are much hotter than their temperate forest counterparts which have lower insolation.
 because insolation plays such a big role in the heating and cooling effects of albedo high insolation areas like the tropics will tend to show a more pronounced fluctuation in local temperature when local albedo changes.
 climate and weather albedo affects climate and drives weather .
 all weather is a result of the uneven heating of earth caused by different areas of the planet having different albedos.
 essentially for the driving of weather there are two types of albedo regions on earth land and ocean.
 land and ocean regions produce the four basic different types of air masses depending on latitude and therefore insolation warm and dry which form over tropical and sub tropical land masses warm and wet which form over tropical and sub tropical oceans cold and dry which form over temperate polar and sub polar land masses and cold and wet which form over temperate polar and sub polar oceans.
 different temperatures between the air masses result in different air pressures and the masses develop into pressure systems .
 high pressure systems flow toward lower pressure driving weather from north to south in the northern hemisphere and south to north in the lower however due to the spinning of earth the coriolis effect further complicates flow and creates several weather climate bands and the jet stream s.
 albedo temperature feedback when an area s albedo changes due to snowfall a snow temperature feedback results.
 a layer of snowfall increases local albedo reflecting away sunlight leading to local cooling.
 in principle if no outside temperature change affects this area e.
g.
 a warm air mass the raised albedo and lower temperature would maintain the current snow and invite further snowfall deepening the snow temperature feedback.
 however because local weather is dynamic due to the change of season s eventually warm air masses and a more direct angle of sunlight higher insolation cause melting.
 when the melted area reveals surfaces with lower albedo such as grass or soil the effect is reversed the darkening surface lowers albedo increasing local temperatures which induces more melting and thus reducing the albedo further resulting in still more heating.
 snow snow albedo is highly variable ranging from as high as zero .
 nine for freshly fallen snow to about zero .
 four for melting snow and as low as zero .
 two for dirty snow.
 over antarctica they average a little more than zero .
 eight .
 if a marginally snow covered area warms snow tends to melt lowering the albedo and hence leading to more snowmelt because more radiation is being absorbed by the snowpack the ice albedo positive feedback .
 cryoconite powdery windblown dust containing soot sometimes reduces albedo on glaciers and ice sheets.
 hence small errors in albedo can lead to large errors in energy estimates which is why it is important to measure the albedo of snow covered areas through remote sensing techniques rather than applying a single value over broad regions.
 small scale effects albedo works on a smaller scale too.
 in sunlight dark clothes absorb more heat and light coloured clothes reflect it better thus allowing some control over body temperature by exploiting the albedo effect of the colour of external clothing.
 solar photovoltaic effects albedo can affect the electrical energy output of solar photovoltaic device s.
 for example the effects of a spectrally responsive albedo are illustrated by the differences between the spectrally weighted albedo of solar photovoltaic technology based on hydrogenated amorphous silicon a si h and crystalline silicon c si based compared to traditional spectral integrated albedo predictions.
 research showed impacts of over one zero .
 more recently the analysis was extended to the effects of spectral bias due to the specular reflectivity of two two commonly occurring surface materials both human made and natural and analyzes the albedo effects on the performance of seven photovoltaic materials covering three common photovoltaic system topologies industrial solar farms commercial flat rooftops and residential pitched roof applications.
 trees because forests generally have a low albedo the majority of the ultraviolet and visible spectrum is absorbed through photosynthesis some scientists have suggested that greater heat absorption by trees could offset some of the carbon benefits of afforestation or offset the negative climate impacts of deforestation .
 in the case of evergreen forests with seasonal snow cover albedo reduction may be great enough for deforestation to cause a net cooling effect.
 trees also impact climate in extremely complicated ways through evapotranspiration .
 the water vapor causes cooling on the land surface causes heating where it condenses acts a strong greenhouse gas and can increase albedo when it condenses into clouds scientists generally treat evapotranspiration as a net cooling impact and the net climate impact of albedo and evapotranspiration changes from deforestation depends greatly on local climate in seasonally snow covered zones winter albedos of treeless areas are one zero to five zero higher than nearby forested areas because snow does not cover the trees as readily.
 deciduous trees have an albedo value of about zero .
 one five to zero .
 one eight whereas coniferous trees have a value of about zero .
 zero nine to zero .
 one five .
 studies by the hadley centre have investigated the relative generally warming effect of albedo change and cooling effect of carbon sequestration on planting forests.
 they found that new forests in tropical and midlatitude areas tended to cool new forests in high latitudes e.
g.
 siberia were neutral or perhaps warming.
 water water reflects light very differently from typical terrestrial materials.
 the reflectivity of a water surface is calculated using the fresnel equations see graph .
 reflectivity of smooth water at two zero c refractive index one .
 three three three at the scale of the wavelength of light even wavy water is always smooth so the light is reflected in a locally specular manner not diffusely .
 the glint of light off water is a commonplace effect of this.
 at small angles of incident light waviness results in reduced reflectivity because of the steepness of the reflectivity vs.
 incident angle curve and a locally increased average incident angle.
 although the reflectivity of water is very low at low and medium angles of incident light it becomes very high at high angles of incident light such as those that occur on the illuminated side of earth near the terminator early morning late afternoon and near the poles .
 however as mentioned above waviness causes an appreciable reduction.
 because light specularly reflected from water does not usually reach the viewer water is usually considered to have a very low albedo in spite of its high reflectivity at high angles of incident light.
 note that white caps on waves look white and have high albedo because the water is foamed up so there are many superimposed bubble surfaces which reflect adding up their reflectivities.
 fresh black ice exhibits fresnel reflection.
 clouds cloud albedo has substantial influence over atmospheric temperatures.
 different types of clouds exhibit different reflectivity theoretically ranging in albedo from a minimum of near zero to a maximum approaching zero .
 eight .
 on any given day about half of earth is covered by clouds which reflect more sunlight than land and water.
 clouds keep earth cool by reflecting sunlight but they can also serve as blankets to trap warmth.
 albedo and climate in some areas are affected by artificial clouds such as those created by the contrail s of heavy commercial airliner traffic.
 a study following the burning of the kuwaiti oil fields during iraqi occupation showed that temperatures under the burning oil fires were as much as one zero c colder than temperatures several miles away under clear skies.
 aerosol effects aerosols very fine particles droplets in the atmosphere have both direct and indirect effects on earth s radiative balance.
 the direct albedo effect is generally to cool the planet the indirect effect the particles act as cloud condensation nuclei and thereby change cloud properties is less certain.
 as per the effects are aerosol direct effect.
 aerosols directly scatter and absorb radiation.
 the scattering of radiation causes atmospheric cooling whereas absorption can cause atmospheric warming.
 aerosol indirect effect.
 aerosols modify the properties of clouds through a subset of the aerosol population called cloud condensation nuclei .
 increased nuclei concentrations lead to increased cloud droplet number concentrations which in turn leads to increased cloud albedo increased light scattering and radiative cooling first indirect effect but also leads to reduced precipitation efficiency and increased lifetime of the cloud second indirect effect .
 black carbon another albedo related effect on the climate is from black carbon particles.
 the size of this effect is difficult to quantify the intergovernmental panel on climate change estimates that the global mean radiative forcing for black carbon aerosols from fossil fuels is zero .
 two w m two with a range zero .
 one to zero .
 four w m two .
 black carbon is a bigger cause of the melting of the polar ice cap in the arctic than carbon dioxide due to its effect on the albedo.
 james hansen the efficacy of this forcing is two i.
e.
 for a given forcing it is twice as effective as co two in altering global surface air temperature compare zender testimony supra note seven at four figure three see j.
 hansen the efficacy for changes of arctic sea ice albedo is three .
 in additional runs not shown here we found that the efficacy of albedo changes in antarctica is also three .
 see also flanner m.
g.
 c.
s.
 zender j.
t.
 randerson and p.
j.
 rasch present day climate forcing and response from black carbon in snow one one two j.
 geophys.
 res.
 d one one two zero two two zero zero seven the forcing is maximum coincidentally with snowmelt onset triggering strong snow albedo feedback in local springtime.
 consequently the efficacy of black carbon snow forcing is more than three times greater than forcing by co two .
 .
 human activities human activities e.
g.
 deforestation farming and urbanization change the albedo of various areas around the globe.
 however quantification of this effect on the global scale is difficult.
 other types of albedo single scattering albedo is used to define scattering of electromagnetic waves on small particles.
 it depends on properties of the material refractive index the size of the particle or particles and the wavelength of the incoming radiation.
 see also cool roof daisyworld emissivity global dimming irradiance polar see saw solar radiation management references external links official website of albedo project global albedo project center for clouds chemistry and climate albedo encyclopedia of earth nasa modis brdf albedo product site surface albedo derived from meteosat observations a discussion of lunar albedos reflectivity of metals chart climate forcing climatology electromagnetic radiation radiometry scattering absorption and radiative transfer optics radiation english articles writing cursive forms of a a named plural as a s a s a s or aes is the first letter and the first vowel in the iso basic latin alphabet .
 it is similar to the ancient greek letter alpha from which it derives.
 the upper case version consists of the two slanting sides of a triangle crossed in the middle by a horizontal bar.
 the lower case version can be written in two forms the double storey a and single storey .
 the latter is commonly used in handwriting and fonts based on it especially fonts intended to be read by children.
 it is also found in italic type .
 history the earliest certain ancestor of a is aleph also written aleph the first letter of the phoenician alphabet which consisted entirely of consonant s for that reason it is also called an abjad to distinguish it from a true alphabet .
 in turn the ancestor of aleph may have been a pictogram of an ox head in proto sinaitic script influenced by egyptian hieroglyphs styled as a triangular head with two horns extended.
 in one six zero zero b.
c.
e.
 the phoenician alphabet letter had a linear form that served as the base for some later forms.
 its name must have corresponded closely to the hebrew or arabic aleph.
 when the ancient greeks adopted the alphabet they had no use for the glottal stop the consonant sound that the letter denoted in phoenician and other semitic languages and that was the first phoneme of the phoenician pronunciation of the letter so they used their version of the sign to represent the vowel and called it by the similar name of alpha .
 in the earliest greek inscriptions after the greek dark ages dating to the eight th century bc the letter rests upon its side but in the greek alphabet of later times it generally resembles the modern capital letter although many local varieties can be distinguished by the shortening of one leg or by the angle at which the cross line is set.
 the etruscans brought the greek alphabet to their civilization in the italian peninsula and left the letter unchanged.
 the romans later adopted the etruscan alphabet to write the latin language and the resulting letter was preserved in the latin alphabet that would come to be used to write many languages including english.
 typographic variants different glyphs of the lowercase letter a.
 during roman times there were many variant forms of the letter a .
 first was the monumental or lapidary style which was used when inscribing on stone or other permanent mediums.
 there was also a cursive style used for everyday or utilitarian writing which was done on more perishable surfaces.
 due to the perishable nature of these surfaces there as not as many examples of this style as there are of the monumental but there are still many surviving examples of different types of cursive such as majuscule cursive minuscule cursive and semicursive minuscule.
 variants also existed that were intermediate between the monumental and cursive styles.
 the known variants include the early semi uncial the uncial and the later semi uncial.
 typographic variants include a double storey a and single storey .
 at the end of the roman empire five th century ad several variants of the cursive minuscule developed through western europe.
 among these were the semicursive minuscule of italy the merovingian script in france the visigothic script in spain and the insular or anglo irish semi uncial or anglo saxon majuscule of great britain.
 by the nine th century the caroline script which was very similar to the present day form was the principal form used in book making before the advent of the printing press.
 this form was derived through a combining of prior forms.
 one five th century italy saw the formation of the two main variants that are known today.
 these variants the italic and roman forms were derived from the caroline script version.
 the italic form also called script a is used in most current handwriting and consists of a circle and vertical stroke.
 this slowly developed from the fifth century form resembling the greek letter tau in the hands of medieval irish and english writers.
 most printed material uses the roman form consisting of a small loop with an arc over it .
 both derive from the majuscule capital form.
 in greek handwriting it was common to join the left leg and horizontal stroke into a single loop as demonstrated by the uncial version shown.
 many fonts then made the right leg vertical.
 in some of these the serif that began the right leg stroke developed into an arc resulting in the printed form while in others it was dropped resulting in the modern handwritten form.
 italic type is commonly used to mark emphasis or more generally to distinguish one part of a text from the rest set in roman type .
 however there are also some other cases aside from this where script a also called latin alpha is used in contrast with latin a such as in the international phonetic alphabet .
 use in writing systems english in modern english orthography the letter represents seven different vowel sounds the near open front unrounded vowel as in pad the open back unrounded vowel as in father which is closer to its original latin and greek sound the diphthong as in ace and major usually when is followed by one or occasionally two consonants and then another vowel letter this results from middle english lengthening followed by the great vowel shift the modified form of the above sound that occurs before as in square and mary the rounded vowel of water the shorter rounded vowel not present in general american in was and what a schwa in many unstressed syllables as in about comma solar .
 the double sequence does not occur in native english words but is found in some words derived from foreign languages such as aaron and aardvark .
 however occurs in many common digraphs all with their own sound or sounds particularly and .
 is the third most commonly used letter in english after and and the second most common in spanish and french.
 in one study on average about three .
 six eight of letters used in english texts tend to be while the number is six .
 two two in spanish and three .
 nine five in french.
 other languages in most languages that use the latin alphabet denotes an open unrounded vowel such as or .
 an exception is saanich in which and the glyph stands for a close mid front unrounded vowel .
 other systems in phonetic and phonemic notation in the international phonetic alphabet is used for the open front unrounded vowel is used for the open central unrounded vowel and is used for the open back unrounded vowel .
 in x sampa is used for the open front unrounded vowel and is used for the open back unrounded vowel .
 other uses in algebra the letter a along with other letters at the beginning of the alphabet is used to represent known quantities whereas the letters at the end of the alphabet x y z are used to denote unknown quantities.
 in geometry capital a b c etc.
 are used to denote segment s line s rays etc.
 a capital a is also typically used as one of the letters to represent an angle in a triangle the lowercase a representing the side opposite angle a.
 in logic a is used to signify the universal affirmative .
 in physics a is the si unit symbol for ampere .
 a is often used to denote something or someone of a better or more prestigious quality or status a a or a the best grade that can be assigned by teachers for students schoolwork a grade for clean restaurants a list celebrities etc.
 such associations can have a motivating effect as exposure to the letter a has been found to improve performance when compared with other letters.
 finally the letter a is used to denote size as in a narrow size shoe or a small cup size in a brassiere .
 related characters ancestors descendants and siblings semitic letter aleph from which the following symbols originally derive greek letter alpha from which a derives cyrillic letter a which also derives from alpha phonetic alphabet symbols related to a the international phonetic alphabet only uses lowercase but uppercase forms are used in some other writing systems latin letter alpha script a which represents an open back unrounded vowel in the ipa turned a which represents a near open central vowel in the ipa turned v also called a wedge a caret or a hat which represents an open mid back unrounded vowel in the ipa small capital a an obsolete or non standard symbol in the international phonetic alphabet used to represent various sounds mainly open vowels a with diacritic s ligatures and abbreviations an ordinal indicator a turned capital letter a used in predicate logic to specify universal quantification for all latin ae ligature at sign argentine austral computing codes one other representations notes footnotes references external links history of the alphabet iso basic latin letters vowel letters alabama is a state located in the southeastern region of the united states.
 it is bordered by tennessee to the north georgia to the east florida and the gulf of mexico to the south and mississippi to the west.
 alabama is the three zero th most extensive and the two four th most populous of the five zero united states .
 at alabama has one of the longest navigable inland waterways in the nation.
 from the american civil war until world war ii alabama like many southern states suffered economic hardship in part because of continued dependence on agriculture.
 despite the growth of major industries and urban centers white rural interests dominated the state legislature from one nine zero one to the one nine six zero s as it did not regularly reapportion the legislature from one nine zero one to one nine six one urban interests and african americans were markedly under represented.
 african americans and poor whites were essentially disenfranchised altogether by the state constitution of one nine zero one a status that continued into the mid one nine six zero s before being alleviated by federal legislation.
 exclusion of minorities continued under at large voting systems in most counties some changes were made through a series of omnibus court cases in the late one nine eight zero s to establish different electoral systems.
 following world war ii alabama experienced growth as the economy of the state changed from one primarily based on agriculture to one with diversified interests.
 the power of the solid south in congress gained the establishment or expansion of multiple united states armed forces installations which helped to bridge the gap between an agricultural and industrial economy during the mid two zero th century.
 the state economy in the two one st century is based on management automotive finance manufacturing aerospace mineral extraction healthcare education retail and technology.
 alabama is nicknamed the yellowhammer state after the state bird .
 alabama is also known as the heart of dixie and the cotton state .
 the state tree is the longleaf pine and the state flower is the camellia .
 the capital of alabama is montgomery .
 the largest city by population is birmingham which has long been the most industrialized city and largest city by total land area is huntsville .
 the oldest city is mobile founded by french colonists .
 etymology one of the entrances to russell cave in jackson county.
 charcoal from indigenous camp fires in the cave has been dated as early as six five five zero to six one four five bc.
 the european american naming of the alabama river and state originates from the alabama people a muskogean speaking tribe whose members lived just below the confluence of the coosa and tallapoosa rivers on the upper reaches of the river.
 in the alabama language the word for an alabama person is albaamo or variously albaama or alb amo in different dialects the plural form is albaamaha .
 the word alabama is believed to have come from the related choctaw language and was adopted by the alabama tribe as their name.
 the spelling of the word varies significantly among historical sources.
 the first usage appears in three accounts of the hernando de soto expedition of one five four zero with garcilaso de la vega using alibamo while the knight of elvas and rodrigo ranjel wrote alibamu and limamu respectively in efforts to transliterate the term.
 as early as one seven zero two the french called the tribe the alibamon with french maps identifying the river as rivi re des alibamons .
 other spellings of the appellation have included alibamu alabamo albama alebamon alibama alibamou alabamu allibamou .
 and possibly alabahmu .
 the use of state names derived from native american languages is common an estimated two seven states have names of native american origin.
 sources disagree on the meaning of the word.
 an one eight four two article in the jacksonville republican proposed that it meant here we rest.
 this notion was popularized in the one eight five zero s through the writings of alexander beaufort meek .
 experts in the muskogean languages have been unable to find any evidence to support such a translation.
 scholars believe the word comes from the choctaw alba meaning plants or weeds and amo meaning to cut to trim or to gather .
 the meaning may have been clearers of the thicket or herb gatherers referring to clearing land for cultivation or collecting medicinal plants.
 the state has numerous place names of native american origin .
 history pre european settlement indigenous peoples of varying cultures lived in the area for thousands of years before european colonization.
 trade with the northeastern tribes via the ohio river began during the burial mound period one zero zero zero bc ad seven zero zero and continued until european contact .
 the moundville archaeological site in hale county.
 it was occupied by native americans of the mississippian culture from one zero zero zero to one four five zero ad.
 the agrarian mississippian culture covered most of the state from one zero zero zero to one six zero zero ad with one of its major centers built at what is now the moundville archaeological site in moundville alabama .
 this is the second largest complex of the classic middle mississippian era after cahokia in present day illinois which was the center of the culture.
 analysis of artifacts recovered from archaeological excavations at moundville were the basis of scholars formulating the characteristics of the southeastern ceremonial complex secc .
 contrary to popular belief the secc appears to have no direct links to mesoamerica n culture but developed independently.
 the ceremonial complex represents a major component of the religion of the mississippian peoples it is one of the primary means by which their religion is understood.
 among the historical tribes of native american people living in the area of present day alabama at the time of european contact were the cherokee an iroquoian language people and the muskogean speaking alabama alibamu chickasaw choctaw creek and koasati .
 while part of the same large language family the muskogee tribes developed distinct cultures and languages.
 european settlement with exploration in the one six th century the spanish were the first europeans to reach alabama.
 the expedition of hernando de soto passed through mabila and other parts of the state in one five four zero .
 more than one six zero years later the french founded the first european settlement in the region at old mobile in one seven zero two .
 the city was moved to the current site of mobile in one seven one one .
 this area was claimed by the french from one seven zero two to one seven six three as part of la louisiane .
 after the french lost to the british in the seven years war it became part of british west florida from one seven six three to one seven eight three .
 after the united states victory in the american revolutionary war the territory was divided between the united states and spain.
 the latter retained control of this western territory from one seven eight three until the surrender of the spanish garrison at mobile to u.
s.
 forces on april one three one eight one three .
 thomas bassett a loyalist to the british monarchy during the revolutionary era was one of the earliest white settlers in the state outside mobile.
 he settled in the tombigbee district during the early one seven seven zero s.
 the boundaries of the district were roughly limited to the area within a few miles of the tombigbee river and included portions of what is today southern clarke county northernmost mobile county and most of washington county .
 what is now the counties of baldwin and mobile became part of spanish west florida in one seven eight three part of the independent republic of west florida in one eight one zero and was finally added to the mississippi territory in one eight one two .
 most of what is now the northern two thirds of alabama was known as the yazoo lands beginning during the british colonial period.
 it was claimed by the province of georgia from one seven six seven onwards.
 following the revolutionary war it remained a part of georgia although heavily disputed.
 upright zero .
 nine map showing the formation of the mississippi and alabama territories with the exception of the area around mobile and the yazoo lands what is now the lower one third alabama was made part of the mississippi territory when it was organized in one seven nine eight .
 the yazoo lands were added to the territory in one eight zero four following the yazoo land scandal .
 spain kept a claim on its former spanish west florida territory in what would become the coastal counties until the adams on s treaty officially ceded it to the united states in one eight one nine .
 one nine th century prior to the admission of mississippi as a state on december one zero one eight one seven the more sparsely settled eastern half of the territory was separated and named the alabama territory .
 the alabama territory was created by the united states congress on march three one eight one seven .
 st.
 stephens now abandoned served as the territorial capital from one eight one seven to one eight one nine .
 the u.
s.
 congress selected huntsville as the site for the first constitutional convention of alabama after it was approved to become the two two nd state.
 from july five to august two one eight one nine delegates met to prepare the new state constitution.
 huntsville served as the temporary capital of alabama from one eight one nine to one eight two zero when the seat of state government was moved to cahaba in dallas county .
 the main house built in one eight three three at thornhill in greene county.
 it is a former black belt plantation.
 cahaba now a ghost town was the first permanent state capital from one eight two zero to one eight two five .
 alabama fever was already underway when the state was admitted to the union with settlers and land speculators pouring into the state to take advantage of fertile land suitable for cotton cultivation.
 part of the frontier in the one eight two zero s and one eight three zero s its constitution provided for universal suffrage for white men.
 southeastern planters and traders from the upper south brought slaves with them as the cotton plantations in alabama expanded.
 the economy of the central black belt named for its dark productive soil was built around large cotton plantations whose owners wealth grew largely from slave labor.
 the area also drew many poor disfranchised people who became subsistence farmers .
 alabama had a population estimated at under one zero zero zero zero people in one eight one zero but it had increased to more than three zero zero zero zero zero people by one eight three zero .
 most native american tribes were completely removed from the state within a few years of the passage of the indian removal act by congress in one eight three zero .
 ruins of the former capitol building in tuscaloosa.
 designed by william nichols it was built from one eight two seven two nine and was destroyed by fire in one nine two three .
 from one eight two six to one eight four six tuscaloosa served as the capital of alabama.
 on january three zero one eight four six the alabama legislature announced that it had voted to move the capital city from tuscaloosa to montgomery .
 the first legislative session in the new capital met in december one eight four seven .
 a new capitol building was erected under the direction of stephen decatur button of philadelphia .
 the first structure burned down in one eight four nine but was rebuilt on the same site in one eight five one .
 this second capitol building in montgomery remains to the present day.
 it was designed by barachias holt of exeter maine .
 by one eight six zero the population had increased to a total of nine six four two zero one people of which nearly half four three five zero eight zero were enslaved african americans and two six nine zero were free people of color .
 on january one one one eight six one alabama declared its secession from the union .
 after remaining an independent republic for a few days it joined the confederate states of america .
 the confederacy s capital was initially located at montgomery .
 alabama was heavily involved in the american civil war .
 although comparatively few battles were fought in the state alabama contributed about one two zero zero zero zero soldiers to the war effort.
 union army troops occupying courthouse square in huntsville following its capture and reoccupation by federal forces in one eight six four .
 a company of cavalry soldiers from huntsville alabama joined nathan bedford forrest s battalion in hopkinsville kentucky .
 the company wore new uniforms with yellow trim on the sleeves collar and coat tails.
 this led to them being greeted with yellowhammer and the name later was applied to all alabama troops in the confederate army.
 alabama s slaves were freed by the one three th amendment in one eight six five .
 alabama was under military rule from the end of the war in may one eight six five until its official restoration to the union in one eight six eight .
 from one eight six seven to one eight seven four with most white citizens barred temporarily from voting and freedmen enfranchised many african americans emerged as political leaders in the state.
 alabama was represented in congress during this period by three african american congressmen jeremiah haralson benjamin s.
 turner and james t.
 rapier .
 following the war the state remained chiefly agricultural with an economy tied to cotton.
 during reconstruction state legislators ratified a new state constitution in one eight six eight that created the state s first public school system and expanded women s rights.
 legislators funded numerous public road and railroad projects although these were plagued with allegations of fraud and misappropriation.
 organized insurgent resistance groups tried to suppress the freedmen and republicans.
 besides the short lived original ku klux klan these included the pale faces knights of the white camellia red shirts and the white league .
 reconstruction in alabama ended in one eight seven four when the democrats regained control of the legislature and governor s office through an election dominated by fraud and violence.
 they wrote another constitution in one eight seven five and the legislature passed the blaine amendment prohibiting public money from being used to finance religious affiliated schools.
 the same year legislation was approved that called for racially segregated schools.
 railroad passenger cars were segregated in one eight nine one .
 after disfranchising most african americans and many poor whites in the one nine zero one constitution the alabama legislature passed more jim crow laws at the beginning of the two zero th century to impose segregation in everyday life.
 two zero th century the developing skyline of birmingham in one nine one five the new one nine zero one constitution of alabama included provisions for voter registration that effectively disenfranchised large portions of the population including nearly all african americans and native americans and tens of thousands of poor whites through making voter registration difficult requiring a poll taxes and literacy test .
 by one nine zero three only two nine eight zero african americans were registered in alabama although at least seven four zero zero zero were literate .
 this compared to more than one eight one zero zero zero african americans eligible to vote in one nine zero zero .
 the numbers dropped even more in later decades.
 while the planter class had persuaded poor whites to vote for this legislative effort to suppress black voting the new restrictions resulted in their disenfranchisement as well due mostly to the imposition of a cumulative poll tax.
 by one nine four one whites constituted a slight majority of those disenfranchised by these laws six zero zero zero zero zero whites vs.
 five two zero zero zero zero african americans.
 nearly all african americans had lost the ability to vote.
 despite numerous legal challenges that succeeded in overturning certain provisions the state legislature would create new ones to maintain disenfranchisement.
 the exclusion of blacks from the political system persisted until after passage of federal civil rights legislation in the one nine six five to enforce their constitutional rights as citizens.
 the one nine zero one constitution required racial segregation of public schools.
 it also restated that interracial marriage was illegal as it had been prohibited in one eight six seven .
 into the one nine five zero s the state legislature passed additional racial segregation laws related to public facilities jails were segregated in one nine one one hospitals in one nine one five toilets hotels and restaurants in one nine two eight and bus stop waiting rooms in one nine four five .
 the rural dominated alabama legislature consistently underfunded schools and services for the disenfranchised african americans but it did not relieve them of paying taxes.
 partially as a response to chronic underfunding of education for african americans in the south the rosenwald fund began funding the construction of what came to be known as rosenwald school s.
 in alabama these schools were designed and the construction partially financed with rosenwald funds which paid one third of the construction costs.
 the fund required the local community and state to raise matching funds to pay the rest.
 black residents effectively taxed themselves twice by raising additional monies to supply matching funds for such schools which were built in many rural areas.
 they often donated land and labor as well.
 the former mount sinai school in rural autauga county completed in one nine one nine .
 it was one of the three eight seven rosenwald schools built in the state.
 beginning in one nine one three the first eight zero rosenwald school s were built in alabama for african american children.
 a total of three eight seven schools seven teachers houses and several vocational buildings were completed by one nine three seven in the state.
 several of the surviving school buildings in the state are now listed on the national register of historic places .
 continued racial discrimination and lynching s agricultural depression and the failure of the cotton crops due to boll weevil infestation led tens of thousands of african americans from rural alabama and other states to seek opportunities in northern and midwestern cities during the early decades of the two zero th century as part of the great migration out of the south.
 reflecting this emigration the population growth rate in alabama see historical populations table below dropped by nearly half from one nine one zero to one nine two zero .
 at the same time many rural people both white and african american migrated to the city of birmingham to work in new industrial jobs.
 birmingham experienced such rapid growth that it was called the magic city .
 by the one nine two zero s birmingham was the one nine th largest city in the united states and had more than three zero of the state s population.
 heavy industry and mining were the basis of its economy.
 its residents were under represented for decades in the state legislature which refused to redistrict after each decennial census according to population changes as it was required by the state constitution.
 this did not change until the late one nine six zero s following a lawsuit and court order.
 beginning in the one nine four zero s when the courts started taking the first steps to recognize the voting rights of black voters the alabama legislature took several counter steps designed to disfranchise black voters.
 the legislature passed and the voters ratified as these were mostly white voters a state constitutional amendment that gave local registrars greater latitude to disqualify voter registration applicants.
 black citizens in mobile successfully challenged this amendment as a violation of the fifteenth amendment .
 the legislature also changed the boundaries of tuskegee to a two eight sided figure designed to fence out blacks from the city limits.
 the supreme court unanimously held that this racial gerrymandering violated the constitution.
 in one nine six one .
.
.
 the alabama legislature also intentionally diluted the effect of the black vote by instituting numbered place requirements for local elections.
 industrial development related to the demands of world war ii brought a level of prosperity to the state not seen since before the civil war.
 rural workers poured into the largest cities in the state for better jobs and a higher standard of living.
 one example of this massive influx of workers occurred in mobile.
 between one nine four zero and one nine four three more than eight nine zero zero zero people moved into the city to work for war related industries.
 cotton and other cash crops faded in importance as the state developed a manufacturing and service base.
 despite massive population changes in the state from one nine zero one to one nine six one the rural dominated legislature refused to reapportion house and senate seats based on population as required by the state constitution to follow the results of decennial censuses.
 they held on to old representation to maintain political and economic power in agricultural areas.
 in addition the state legislature gerrymandered the few birmingham legislative seats to ensure election by persons living outside birmingham.
 one result was that jefferson county containing birmingham s industrial and economic powerhouse contributed more than one third of all tax revenue to the state but did not receive a proportional amount in services.
 urban interests were consistently underrepresented in the legislature.
 a one nine six zero study noted that because of rural domination a minority of about two five per cent of the total state population is in majority control of the alabama legislature.
 a class action suit initiated on behalf of plaintiffs in lowndes county alabama challenged the state legislature s lack of redistricting for congressional seats.
 in one nine six two white v.
 crook judge frank m.
 johnson ordered the state to redistrict.
 united states supreme court cases of baker v.
 carr one nine six two and reynolds v.
 sims one nine six four ruled that the principle of one man one vote needed to be the basis of both houses of state legislatures as well and that their districts had to be based on population rather than geographic counties as alabama had used for its senate.
 in one nine seven two for the first time since one nine zero one the legislature completed the first congressional redistricting based on the decennial census.
 this benefited the urban areas that had developed as well as all in the population who had been underrepresented for more than six zero years.
 other changes were made to implement representative state house and senate districts.
 african americans continued to press in the one nine five zero s and one nine six zero s to end disenfranchisement and segregation in the state through the civil rights movement including legal challenges.
 in one nine five four the us supreme court ruled in brown v.
 board of education that public schools had to be desegregated but alabama was slow to comply.
 during the one nine six zero s under governor george wallace alabama resisted compliance with federal demands for desegregation .
the civil rights movement had notable events in alabama including the montgomery bus boycott one nine five five five six freedom rides in one nine six one and one nine six five selma to montgomery marches .
 these contributed to congressional passage and enactment of the civil rights act of one nine six four and voting rights act of one nine six five by the u.
s.
 congress.
 legal segregation ended in the states in one nine six four but jim crow customs often continued until specifically challenged in court.
 despite recommendations of a one nine seven three alabama constitutional commission the state legislature did not approve an amendment to establish home rule for counties.
 there is very limited home rule but the legislature is deeply involved in passing legislation that applies to county level functions and policies.
 this both deprives local residents of the ability to govern themselves and distracts the legislature from statewide issues.
 alabama has made some changes since the late two zero th century and has used new types of voting to increase representation.
 in the one nine eight zero s an omnibus redistricting case dillard v.
 crenshaw county challenged the at large voting for representative seats of one eight zero alabama jurisdictions including counties and school boards.
 at large voting had diluted the votes of any minority in a county as the majority tended to take all seats.
 despite african americans making up a significant minority in the state they had been unable to elect any representatives in most of the at large jurisdictions.
 as part of settlement of this case five alabama cites and counties including chilton county adopted a system of cumulative voting for election of representatives in multi seat jurisdictions.
 this has resulted in more proportional representation for voters.
 in another form of proportional representation two three jurisdictions use limited voting as in conecuh county .
 in one nine eight two limited voting was first tested in conecuh county .
 together use of these systems has increased the number of african americans and women being elected to local offices resulting in governments that are more representative of their citizens.
 geography a general map of alabama alabama is the thirtieth largest state in the united states with of total area three .
 two of the area is water making alabama two three rd in the amount of surface water also giving it the second largest inland waterway system in the u.
s.
 about three fifths of the land area is a gentle plain with a general descent towards the mississippi river and the gulf of mexico .
 the north alabama region is mostly mountainous with the tennessee river cutting a large valley and creating numerous creeks streams rivers mountains and lakes.
 alabama is bordered by the states of tennessee to the north georgia to the east florida to the south and mississippi to the west.
 alabama has coastline at the gulf of mexico in the extreme southern edge of the state.
 the state ranges in elevation from sea level at mobile bay to over one eight zero zero feet five five zero m in the appalachian mountains in the northeast.
 the highest point is mount cheaha at a height of .
 alabama s land consists of of forest or six seven of total land area.
 suburban baldwin county along the gulf coast is the largest county in the state in both land area and water area.
 areas in alabama administered by the national park service include horseshoe bend national military park near alexander city little river canyon national preserve near fort payne russell cave national monument in bridgeport tuskegee airmen national historic site in tuskegee and tuskegee institute national historic site near tuskegee.
 additionally alabama has four national forests conecuh talladega tuskegee and william b.
 bankhead .
 alabama also contains the natchez trace parkway the selma to montgomery national historic trail and the trail of tears national historic trail .
 a notable natural wonder in alabama is natural bridge rock the longest natural bridge east of the rockies located just south of haleyville .
 a wide meteorite impact crater is located in elmore county just north of montgomery.
 this is the wetumpka crater the site of alabama s greatest natural disaster.
 a wide meteorite hit the area about eight zero million years ago.
 the hills just east of downtown wetumpka showcase the eroded remains of the impact crater that was blasted into the bedrock with the area labeled the wetumpka crater or astrobleme star wound because of the concentric rings of fractures and zones of shattered rock that can be found beneath the surface.
 in two zero zero two christian koeberl with the institute of geochemistry university of vienna published evidence and established the site as the one five seven th recognized impact crater on earth.
 climate upright autumn tree in birmingham the state is classified as humid subtropical cfa under the koppen climate classification .
 the average annual temperature is six four f one eight c .
 temperatures tend to be warmer in the southern part of the state with its proximity to the gulf of mexico while the northern parts of the state especially in the appalachian mountains in the northeast tend to be slightly cooler.
 generally alabama has very hot summers and mild winters with copious precipitation throughout the year.
 alabama receives an average of of rainfall annually and enjoys a lengthy growing season of up to three zero zero days in the southern part of the state.
 summers in alabama are among the hottest in the u.
s.
 with high temperatures averaging over throughout the summer in some parts of the state.
 alabama is also prone to tropical storm s and even hurricane s.
 areas of the state far away from the gulf are not immune to the effects of the storms which often dump tremendous amounts of rain as they move inland and weaken.
 south alabama reports many thunderstorms .
 the gulf coast around mobile bay averages between seven zero and eight zero days per year with thunder reported.
 this activity decreases somewhat further north in the state but even the far north of the state reports thunder on about six zero days per year.
 occasionally thunderstorms are severe with frequent lightning and large hail the central and northern parts of the state are most vulnerable to this type of storm.
 alabama ranks ninth in the number of deaths from lightning and tenth in the number of deaths from lightning strikes per capita.
 tornado damage in phil campbell following the statewide april two seven two zero one one tornado outbreak .
 alabama along with oklahoma has the most reported ef five tornadoes of any state according to statistics from the national climatic data center for the period january one one nine five zero to june two zero one three .
 several long tracked f five ef five tornadoes have contributed to alabama reporting more tornado fatalities than any other state.
 the state was affected by the one nine seven four super outbreak and was devastated tremendously by the two zero one one super outbreak .
 the two zero one one super outbreak produced a record amount of tornadoes in the state.
 the tally reached six two .
 snowfall outside birmingham city hall in february two zero one zero the peak season for tornadoes varies from the northern to southern parts of the state.
 alabama is one of the few places in the world that has a secondary tornado season in november and december along with the spring severe weather season.
 the northern part of the state along the tennessee valley is one of the areas in the u.
s.
 most vulnerable to violent tornadoes.
 the area of alabama and mississippi most affected by tornadoes is sometimes referred to as dixie alley as distinct from the tornado alley of the southern plains.
 winters are generally mild in alabama as they are throughout most of the southeastern u.
s.
 with average january low temperatures around in mobile and around in birmingham.
 although snow is a rare event in much of alabama areas of the state north of montgomery may receive a dusting of snow a few times every winter with an occasional moderately heavy snowfall every few years.
 historic snowfall events include new year s eve one nine six three snowstorm and the one nine nine three storm of the century .
 the annual average snowfall for the birmingham area is per year.
 in the southern gulf coast snowfall is less frequent sometimes going several years without any snowfall.
 alabama s highest temperature of was recorded on september five one nine two five in the unincorporated community of centerville .
 the record low of occurred on january three zero one nine six six in new market .
 flora and fauna a stand of cahaba lilies hymenocallis coronaria in the cahaba river within the cahaba river national wildlife refuge .
 alabama is home to a diverse array of flora and fauna due largely to a variety of habitats that range from the tennessee valley appalachian plateau and ridge and valley appalachians of the north to the piedmont canebrake and black belt of the central region to the gulf coastal plain and beaches along the gulf of mexico in the south.
 the state is usually ranked among the top in nation for its range of overall biodiversity .
 alabama once boasted huge expanses of pine forest which still form the largest proportion of forests in the state.
 it currently ranks fifth in the nation for the diversity of its flora.
 it is home to nearly four zero zero zero pteridophyte and spermatophyte plant species.
 indigenous animal species in the state include six two mammal species nine three reptile species seven three amphibian species roughly three zero seven native freshwater fish species and four two zero bird species that spend at least part of their year within the state.
 invertebrates include eight three crayfish species and three eight three mollusk species.
 one one three of these mollusk species have never been collected outside the state.
 demographics alabama s population density the united states census bureau estimates that the population of alabama was four eight five eight nine seven nine on july one two zero one five which represents an increase of seven nine two four three or one .
 six six since the two zero one zero census .
 this includes a natural increase since the last census of one two one zero five four people that is five zero two four five seven births minus three eight one four zero three deaths and an increase due to net migration of one zero four nine nine one people into the state.
 immigration from outside the u.
s.
 resulted in a net increase of three one one eight zero people and migration within the country produced a net gain of seven three eight one one people.
 the state had one zero eight zero zero zero foreign born two .
 four of the state population of which an estimated two two .
 two were illegal immigrants two four zero zero zero .
 the center of population of alabama is located in chilton county outside the town of jemison .
 race and ancestry according to the two zero one zero census alabama had a population of four seven seven nine seven three six .
 the racial composition of the state was six eight .
 five white six seven .
 zero non hispanic white and one .
 five hispanic white two six .
 two black or african american three .
 nine hispanic or latino of any race one .
 one asian zero .
 six american indian and alaska native zero .
 one native hawaiian and other pacific islander two .
 zero from some other race and one .
 five from two or more races.
 in two zero one one four six .
 six of alabama s population younger than age one were minorities.
 the largest reported ancestry groups in alabama are african american two six .
 two english two three .
 six irish seven .
 seven german five .
 seven and scots irish two .
 zero .
 those citing american ancestry in alabama are generally of english or british ancestry many anglo americans identify as having american ancestry because their roots have been in north america for so long in some cases since the one six zero zero s.
 demographers estimate that a minimum of two zero two three of people in alabama are of predominantly english ancestry and that the figure is likely higher.
 in the one nine eight zero census four one of the people in alabama identified as being of english ancestry making them the largest ethnic group at the time.
 based on historic migration and settlement patterns in the southern colonies and states demographers estimated there are more people in alabama of scots irish origins than self reported.
 many people in alabama claim irish ancestry because of the term scots irish but based on historic immigration and settlement their ancestors were more likely protestant scots irish coming from northern ireland where they had been for a few generations as part of the english colonization.
 the scots irish were the largest non english immigrant group from the british isles before the american revolution and many settled in the south later moving into the deep south as it was developed.
 in one nine eight four under the davis strong act the state legislature established the alabama indian affairs commission .
 native american groups within the state had increasingly been demanding recognition as ethnic groups and seeking an end to discrimination.
 given the long history of slavery and associated racial segregation the native american peoples who have sometimes been of mixed race have insisted on having their cultural identification respected.
 in the past their self identification was often overlooked as the state tried to impose a binary breakdown of society into white and black.
 the state has officially recognized nine american indian tribes in the state descended mostly from the five civilized tribes of the american southeast.
 these are poarch band of creek indians who also have federal recognition mowa band of choctaw indians star clan of muscogee creeks echota cherokee tribe of alabama cherokee tribe of northeast alabama cher o creek intra tribal indians ma chis lower creek indian tribe piqua shawnee tribe and ani yun wiya nation.
 the state government has promoted recognition of native american contributions to the state including the designation in two zero zero zero for columbus day to be jointly celebrated as american indian heritage day.
 population centers birmingham largest city and metropolitan area huntsville second largest metropolitan area mobile third largest metropolitan area montgomery fourth largest metropolitan area sources census.
gov sources census.
gov language nine five .
 one of all alabama residents five years old or older spoke only english at home in two zero one zero a minor decrease from nine six .
 one in two zero zero zero .
 alabama english is predominantly southern and is related to south midland speech which was taken across the border from tennessee .
 in the major southern speech region there is the decreasing loss of the final r for example the boyd pronunciation of bird.
 in the northern third of the state there is a south midland arm and barb rhyming with form and orb.
 unique words in alabama english include redworm earthworm peckerwood woodpecker snake doctor and snake feeder dragonfly tow sack burlap bag plum peach clingstone french harp harmonica and dog irons andirons .
 religion highlands united methodist church in birmingham part of the five points south historic district briarwood presbyterian church in birmingham temple b nai sholom in huntsville established in one eight seven six .
 it is the oldest synagogue building in continuous use in the state.
 the islamic center of tuscaloosa one of the islamic centers that contain a mosque and facilities for the cultural needs of muslims in the state.
 in the two zero zero eight american religious identification survey eight six of alabama respondents reported their religion as christian including six catholic and one one as having no religion.
 the composition of other traditions is zero .
 five mormon zero .
 five jewish zero .
 five muslim zero .
 five buddhist and zero .
 five hindu.
 christianity alabama is located in the middle of the bible belt a region of numerous protestant christians.
 alabama has been identified as one of the most religious states in the united states with about five eight of the population attending church regularly.
 a majority of people in the state identify as evangelical protestant.
 the three largest denominational groups in alabama are the southern baptist convention the united methodist church and non denominational evangelical protestant.
 in alabama the southern baptist convention has the highest number of adherents with one three eight zero one two one this is followed by the united methodist church with three two seven seven three four adherents non denominational evangelical protestant with two two zero nine three eight adherents and the catholic church with one five zero six four seven adherents.
 many baptist and methodist congregations became established in the great awakening of the early one nine th century when preachers proselytized across the south.
 the assemblies of god had almost six zero zero zero zero members the churches of christ had nearly one two zero zero zero zero members.
 the presbyterian church es strongly associated with scots irish immigrants of the one eight th century and their descendants had a combined membership around seven five zero zero zero pca two eight zero zero nine members in one zero eight congregations pc usa two six two four seven members in one four seven congregations the cumberland presbyterian church six zero zero zero members in five nine congregations the cumberland presbyterian church in america five zero zero zero members and five zero congregations plus the epc and associate reformed presbyterians with two three zero members and nine congregations .
 in a two zero zero seven survey nearly seven zero of respondents could name all four of the christian gospels .
 of those who indicated a religious preference five nine said they possessed a full understanding of their faith and needed no further learning.
 in a two zero zero seven poll nine two of alabamians reported having at least some confidence in churches in the state.
 other faiths although in much smaller numbers many other religious faiths are represented in the state as well including judaism islam hinduism buddhism sikhism the bah faith and unitarian universalism .
 jews have been present in what is now alabama since one seven six three during the colonial era of mobile when sephardic jews immigrated from london.
 the oldest jewish congregation in the state is congregation sha arai shomayim in mobile.
 it was formally recognized by the state legislature on january two five one eight four four .
 later immigrants in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries tended to be ashkenazy jews from eastern europe.
 jewish denominations in the state include two orthodox four conservative ten reform and one humanistic synagogue.
 muslims have been increasing in alabama with three one mosques built by two zero one one many by african american converts.
 islam was a traditional religion in west africa from where many slaves were brought to the colonies and the united states during the centuries of the slave trade.
 several hindu temples and cultural centers in the state have been founded by indian immigrants and their descendants the most well known being the shri swaminarayan mandir in birmingham the hindu temple and cultural center of birmingham in pelham the hindu cultural center of north alabama in capshaw and the hindu mandir and cultural center in tuscaloosa .
 there are six dharma centers and organizations for theravada buddhists .
 most monastic buddhist temples are concentrated in southern mobile county near bayou la batre .
 this area has attracted an influx of refugees from cambodia laos and vietnam during the one nine seven zero s and thereafter.
 the four temples within a ten mile radius of bayou la batre include chua chanh giac wat buddharaksa and wat lao phoutthavihan.
 the first community of adherents of the baha i faith in alabama was founded in one eight nine six by paul k.
 dealy who moved from chicago to fairhope to participate in the growth of fairhope as a utopian community.
 the first community of baha is in alabama was racially integrated from the beginning due to the faith s principles.
 today there is an exhibit honoring dealy in haifa israel at the world center of the baha i faith .
 baha i centers in alabama exist in birmingham alabama huntsville alabama and florence alabama .
 health a centers for disease control and prevention study in two zero zero eight showed that obesity in alabama was a problem with most counties having over two nine of adults obese except for ten which had a rate between two six and two nine .
 residents of the state along with those in five other states were least likely in the nation to be physically active during leisure time.
 alabama and the southeastern u.
s.
 in general has one of the highest incidences of adult onset diabetes in the country exceeding one zero of adults.
 economy the state has invested in aerospace education health care banking and various heavy industries including automobile manufacturing mineral extraction steel production and fabrication .
 by two zero zero six crop and animal production in alabama was valued at one .
 five billion.
 in contrast to the primarily agricultural economy of the previous century this was only about one of the state s gross domestic product.
 the number of private farms has declined at a steady rate since the one nine six zero s as land has been sold to developers timber companies and large farming conglomerates.
 non agricultural employment in two zero zero eight was one two one eight zero zero in management occupations seven one seven five zero in business and financial operations three six seven nine zero in computer related and mathematical occupation four four two zero zero in architecture and engineering one two four one zero in life physical and social sciences three two two six zero in community and social services one two seven seven zero in legal occupations one one six two five zero in education training and library services two seven eight four zero in art design and media occupations one two one one one zero in healthcare four four seven five zero in fire fighting law enforcement and security one five four zero four zero in food preparation and serving seven six six five zero in building and grounds cleaning and maintenance five three two three zero in personal care and services two four four five one zero in sales three three eight seven six zero in office and administration support two zero five one zero in farming fishing and forestry one two zero one five five in construction and mining gas and oil extraction one zero six two eight zero in installation maintenance and repair two two four one one zero in production and one six seven one six zero in transportation and material moving.
 according to the u.
s.
 bureau of economic analysis the two zero zero eight total gross state product was one seven zero billion or two nine four one one per capita.
 alabama s two zero one two gdp increased one .
 two from the previous year.
 the single largest increase came in the area of information.
 in two zero one zero per capita income for the state was two two nine eight four .
 the state s seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was five .
 eight in april two zero one five .
 this compared to a nationwide seasonally adjusted rate of five .
 four .
 largest employers the space shuttle enterprise being tested at marshall space flight center in one nine seven eight .
 hyundai motor manufacturing alabama in montgomery in two zero one zero shelby hall school of computing at the university of south alabama in mobile the five employers that employed the most employees in alabama in april two zero one one were the next twenty largest employers included agriculture alabama s agricultural outputs include poultry and eggs cattle fish plant nursery items peanuts cotton grains such as corn and sorghum vegetables milk soybean s and peaches.
 although known as the cotton state alabama ranks between eighth and tenth in national cotton production according to various reports with texas georgia and mississippi comprising the top three.
 industry alabama s industrial outputs include iron and steel products including cast iron and steel pipe paper lumber and wood products mining mostly coal plastic products cars and trucks and apparel .
 in addition alabama produces aerospace and electronic products mostly in the huntsville area the location of nasa s george c.
 marshall space flight center and the u.
s.
 army materiel command headquartered at redstone arsenal .
 mercedes benz u.
s.
 international in tuscaloosa county was the first automotive facility to locate within the state.
 a great deal of alabama s economic growth since the one nine nine zero s has been due to the state s expanding automotive manufacturing industry.
 located in the state are honda manufacturing of alabama hyundai motor manufacturing alabama mercedes benz u.
s.
 international and toyota motor manufacturing alabama as well as their various suppliers.
 since one nine nine three the automobile industry has generated more than six seven eight zero zero new jobs in the state.
 alabama currently ranks four th in the nation for vehicle exports.
 automakers accounted for approximately a third of the industrial expansion in the state in two zero one two .
 the eight models produced at the state s auto factories totaled combined sales of seven four three three five vehicles for two zero one two .
 the strongest model sales during this period were the hyundai elantra compact car the mercedes benz gl class sport utility vehicle and the honda ridgeline sport utility truck.
 airbus mobile engineering center at the brookley aeroplex in mobile steel producers outokumpu nucor ssab thyssenkrupp and u.
s.
 steel have facilities in alabama and employ over one zero zero zero zero people.
 in may two zero zero seven german steelmaker thyssenkrupp selected calvert in mobile county for a four .
 six five billion combined stainless and carbon steel processing facility.
 thyssenkrupp s stainless steel division inoxum including the stainless portion of the calvert plant was sold to finnish stainless steel company outokumpu in two zero one two .
 the remaining portion of the thyssenkrupp plant had final bids submitted by arcelormittal and nippon steel for one .
 six billion in march two zero one three .
 companhia sider rgica nacional submitted a combined bid for the mill at calvert plus a majority stake in the thyssenkrupp mill in brazil for three .
 eight billion.
 in july two zero one three the plant was sold to arcelormittal and nippon steel.
 the hunt refining company a subsidiary of hunt consolidated inc.
 is based in tuscaloosa and operates a refinery there.
 the company also operates terminals in mobile melvin and moundville .
 jvc america inc.
 operates an optical disc replication and packaging plant in tuscaloosa.
 the goodyear tire and rubber company operates a large plant in gadsden that employs about one four zero zero people.
 it has been in operation since one nine two nine .
 construction of an airbus a three two zero family aircraft assembly plant in mobile was formally announced by airbus ceo fabrice br gier from the mobile convention center on july two two zero one two .
 the plans include a six zero zero million factory at the brookley aeroplex for the assembly of the a three one nine a three two zero and a three two one aircraft.
 construction began in two zero one three with plans for it to become operable by two zero one five and produce up to five zero aircraft per year by two zero one seven .
 the assembly plant is the company s first factory to be built within the united states.
 it was announced on february one two zero one three that airbus had hired alabama based hoar construction to oversee construction of the facility.
 tourism alabama s beaches are one of the state s major tourist destinations.
 an estimated two zero million tourists visit the state each year.
 over one zero zero zero zero zero of these are from other countries including from canada the united kingdom germany and japan.
 in two zero zero six two two .
 three million tourists spent eight .
 three billion providing an estimated one six two zero zero zero jobs in the state.
 healthcare uab hospital is the only level i trauma center in alabama.
 uab is the largest state government employer in alabama with a workforce of about one eight zero zero zero .
 banking regions harbert plaza regions center and wells fargo tower in birmingham s financial district.
 alabama has the headquarters of regions financial corporation bbva compass superior bancorp and the former colonial bancgroup .
 birmingham based compass banchshares was acquired by spanish based bbva in september two zero zero seven although the headquarters of bbva compass remains in birmingham.
 in november two zero zero six regions financial completed its merger with amsouth bancorporation which was also headquartered in birmingham.
 southtrust corporation another large bank headquartered in birmingham was acquired by wachovia in two zero zero four for one four .
 three billion.
 the city still has major operations for wachovia and its now post operating bank wells fargo which includes a regional headquarters an operations center campus and a four zero zero million data center.
 nearly a dozen smaller banks are also headquartered in the birmingham such as superior bancorp servisfirst and new south federal savings bank.
 birmingham also serves as the headquarters for several large investment management companies including harbert management corporation .
 electronics telecommunications provider at as a result urbanized areas were grossly underrepresented.
 it had not changed legislative districts to reflect the decennial censuses either.
 in reynolds v.
 sims one nine six four the us supreme court implemented the principle of one man one vote ruling that congressional districts had to be reapportioned based on censuses as the state already had in its constitution but had not implemented.
 further it ruled that both houses of bicameral state legislatures had to be apportioned by population as there was no constitutional basis for states to have geographically based systems.
 at that time alabama and many other states had to change their legislative districting as many across the country had systems that underrepresented urban areas and districts.
 this had caused decades of underinvestment in such areas.
 for instance birmingham and jefferson county taxes had supplied one third of the state budget but jefferson county received only one six seven th of state services in funding.
 through the legislative delegations the alabama legislature kept control of county governments.
 the executive branch is responsible for the execution and oversight of laws.
 it is headed by the governor of alabama .
 other members of executive branch include the cabinet the attorney general of alabama the alabama secretary of state the alabama state treasurer and the state auditor of alabama .
 the current governor of the state is republican robert bentley .
 the lieutenant governor is republican kay ivey .
 the judicial branch is responsible for interpreting the constitution and applying the law in state criminal and civil cases.
 the state s highest court is the supreme court of alabama .
 alabama uses partisan elections to choose judges and since the one nine eight zero s judicial campaigns have become increasingly politicized.
 the current chief justice of the alabama supreme court is republican roy moore .
 all sitting justices on the alabama supreme court are members of the republican party.
 there are two intermediate appellate court s the court of civil appeals and the court of criminal appeals and four trial court s the circuit court trial court of general jurisdiction and the district probate and municipal courts.
 the members of the legislature take office immediately after the november elections.
 statewide officials such as the governor lieutenant governor attorney general and other constitutional officers take office the following january.
 taxes alabama levies a two four or five percent personal income tax depending upon the amount earned and filing status.
 taxpayers are allowed to deduct their federal income tax from their alabama state tax and can do so even if taking the standard deduction .
 taxpayers who file itemized deductions are also allowed to deduct the federal insurance contributions act tax social security and medicare tax .
 the state s general sales tax rate is four .
 sales tax rates for cities and counties are also added to purchases.
 for example the total sales tax rate in mobile is one zero and there is an additional restaurant tax of one which means that a diner in mobile would pay an one one tax on a meal.
 sales and excise taxes in alabama account for five one of all state and local revenue compared with an average of about three six nationwide.
 alabama is one of seven states that levy a tax on food at the same rate as other goods and one of two states the other being neighboring mississippi which fully taxes groceries without any offsetting relief for low income families.
 most states exempt groceries from sales tax or apply a lower tax rate.
 alabama s income tax on poor working families is among the highest in the united states.
 alabama is the only state that levies income tax on a family of four with income as low as four six zero zero which is barely one quarter of the federal poverty line.
 alabama s threshold is the lowest among the four one states and the district of columbia with income taxes.
 the corporate income tax rate is currently six .
 five .
 the overall federal state and local tax burden in alabama ranks the state as the second least tax burdened state in the country.
 property tax es are the lowest in the u.
s.
 the current state constitution requires a voter referendum to raise property taxes.
 since alabama s tax structure largely depends on consumer spending it is subject to high variable budget structure.
 for example in two zero zero three alabama had an annual budget deficit as high as six seven zero million.
 county and local governments alabama has six seven counties .
 each county has its own elected legislative branch usually called the county commission.
 it also has limited executive authority in the county.
 because of the constraints of the alabama constitution only seven counties jefferson lee mobile madison montgomery shelby and tuscaloosa in the state have limited home rule .
 instead most counties in the state must lobby the local legislation committee of the state legislature to get simple local policies approved ranging from waste disposal to land use zoning.
 the cumbersome process results in local jurisdictions being unable to manage their problems and the state legislators are buried in local county issues.
 the state legislature has retained power over local governments by refusing to pass a constitutional amendment establishing home rule for counties as recommended by the one nine seven three alabama constitutional commission.
 legislative delegations retain certain powers over each county.
 united states supreme court decisions in baker v.
 carr one nine six four required that both houses have districts established on the basis of population and redistricted after each census in order to implement the principle of one man one vote .
 before that each county was represented by one state senator leading to underrepresentation in the state senate for more urbanized populous counties.
 the lack of home rule for counties in alabama has resulted in the proliferation of local legislation permitting counties to do things not authorized by the state constitution.
 alabama s constitution has been amended more than seven zero zero times and almost one third of the amendments are local in nature applying to only one county or city.
 a significant part of each legislative session is spent on local legislation taking away time and attention of legislators from issues of statewide importance.
 on november nine two zero one one jefferson county which was four billion in debt at the time declared bankruptcy.
 this is the second largest chapter nine municipal bankruptcy in the united states after the detroit bankruptcy .
 jefferson county emerged from bankruptcy in december two zero one three following the approval of a bankruptcy plan by the united states bankruptcy court for the northern district of alabama .
 alabama is an alcoholic beverage control state meaning that the state government holds a monopoly on the sale of alcohol.
 the alabama alcoholic beverage control board controls the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state.
 twenty five of the six seven counties are dry counties which ban the sale of alcohol and there are many dry municipalities even in counties which permit alcohol sales.
 politics upright zero .
 seven five robert j.
 bentley governor since january one seven two zero one one upright zero .
 seven five kay ivey lieutenant governor during reconstruction following the american civil war alabama was occupied by federal troops of the third military district under general john pope .
 in one eight seven four the political coalition of white democrats known as the redeemers took control of the state government from the republicans in part by suppressing the african american vote through violence fraud and intimidation.
 after one eight nine zero a coalition of white democratic politicians passed laws to segregate and disenfranchise african american residents a process completed in provisions of the one nine zero one constitution.
 provisions which disenfranchised african americans resulted in excluding many poor whites.
 by one nine four one more whites than african americans had been disenfranchised six zero zero zero zero zero to five two zero zero zero zero .
 the total effects were greater on the african american community as almost all of its citizens were disfranchised and relegated to separate and unequal treatment under the law.
 from one nine zero one through the one nine six zero s the state did not redraw election districts as population grew and shifted within the state during urbanization and industrialization of certain areas.
 as counties were the basis of election districts the result was a rural minority that dominated state politics through nearly three quarters of the century until a series of federal court cases required redistricting in one nine seven two to meet equal representation.
 alabama state politics gained nationwide and international attention in the one nine five zero s and one nine six zero s during the american civil rights movement when whites bureaucratically and at times violently resisted protests for electoral and social reform.
 democrat george wallace the state s only four term governor was a controversial figure who vowed to maintain segregation.
 only after passage of the federal civil rights act of one nine six four and voting rights act of one nine six five did african americans regain the ability to exercise suffrage among other civil rights.
 in many jurisdictions they continued to be excluded from representation by at large electoral systems which allowed the majority of the population to dominate elections.
 some changes at the county level have occurred following court challenges to establish single member districts that enable a more diverse representation among county boards.
 in two zero zero seven the alabama legislature passed and republican governor bob riley signed a resolution expressing profound regret over slavery and its lingering impact.
 in a symbolic ceremony the bill was signed in the alabama state capitol which housed congress of the confederate states of america .
 in two zero one zero republicans won control of both houses of the legislature for the first time in one three six years after a nearly complete realignment of political parties who represent different visions in the two one st century.
 elections state elections with the disfranchisement of african americans in one nine zero one the state became part of the solid south a system in which the democratic party operated as effectively the only viable political party in every southern state.
 for nearly one zero zero years local and state elections in alabama were decided in the democratic party primary with generally only token republican challengers running in the general election.
 since the mid to late two zero th century however there has been a realignment among the two major political parties and white conservatives started shifting to the republican party.
 in alabama majority white districts are now expected to regularly elect republican candidates to federal state and local office.
 members of the nine seats on the alabama supreme court and all ten seats on the state appellate courts are elected to office.
 until one nine nine four no republicans held any of the court seats.
 in that general election the then incumbent chief justice of alabama ernest c.
 hornsby refused to leave office after losing the election by approximately three zero zero zero votes to republican perry o.
 hooper sr.
 .
 hornsby sued alabama and defiantly remained in office for nearly a year before finally giving up the seat after losing in court.
 this ultimately led to a collapse of support for democrats at the ballot box in the next three or four election cycles.
 the democrats lost the last of the nineteen court seats in august two zero one one with the resignation of the last democrat on the bench.
 in the early two one st century republicans hold all seven of the statewide elected executive branch offices.
 republicans hold six of the eight elected seats on the alabama state board of education .
 in two zero one zero republicans took large majorities of both chambers of the state legislature giving them control of that body for the first time in one three six years.
 the last remaining statewide democrat who served on the alabama public service commission was defeated in two zero one two .
 only two republican lieutenant governors have been elected since the end of reconstruction when republicans generally represented reconstruction government including the newly emancipated freedmen who had gained the franchise.
 the two gop lt.
 governors were steve windom one nine nine nine two zero zero three and the current lt.
 governor kay ivey who was elected in two zero one zero and re elected in two zero one four .
 local elections many local offices county commissioners boards of education tax assessors tax collectors etc.
 in the state are still held by democrats.
 many rural counties have voters who are majority democrats resulting in local elections being decided in the democratic primary.
 similarly many metropolitan and suburban counties are majority republican and elections are effectively decided in the republican primary although there are exceptions.
 alabama s six seven county sheriffs are elected in partisan at large races and democrats still retain the narrow majority of those posts.
 the current split is three five democrats three one republicans and one independent fayette .
 however most of the democratic sheriffs preside over rural and less populated counties.
 the majority of republican sheriffs have been elected in the more urban suburban and heavily populated counties.
 the state of alabama has one female sheriff in morgan county alabama and ten african american sheriffs.
 federal elections the state s two u.
s.
 senators are jefferson b.
 sessions iii and richard c.
 shelby both republicans.
 shelby was originally elected to the senate as a democrat in one nine eight six and re elected in one nine nine two but switched parties immediately following the november one nine nine four general election.
 in the u.
s.
 house of representatives the state is represented by seven members six of whom are republicans bradley byrne mike d.
 rogers robert aderholt morris j.
 brooks martha roby and gary palmer and one democrat terri sewell .
 education primary and secondary education vestavia hills high school in the suburbs of birmingham public primary and secondary education in alabama is under the purview of the alabama state board of education as well as local oversight by six seven county school boards and six zero city boards of education.
 together one four nine six individual schools provide education for seven four four six three seven elementary and secondary students.
 public school funding is appropriated through the alabama legislature through the education trust fund.
 in fy two zero zero six two zero zero seven alabama appropriated three seven seven five one six three five seven eight for primary and secondary education.
 that represented an increase of four four four seven three six three eight seven over the previous fiscal year.
 in two zero zero seven over eight two percent of schools made adequate yearly progress ayp toward student proficiency under the national no child left behind law using measures determined by the state of alabama.
 while alabama s public education system has improved in recent decades it lags behind in achievement compared to other states.
 according to u.
s.
 census data alabama s high school graduation rate seven five is the fourth lowest in the u.
s.
 after kentucky louisiana and mississippi .
 the largest educational gains were among people with some college education but without degrees.
 colleges and universities harrison plaza at the university of north alabama in florence.
 the school was chartered as lagrange college by the alabama legislature in one eight three zero .
 alabama s programs of higher education include one four four year public universities two year community colleges and one seven private undergraduate and graduate universities.
 in the state are four medical schools as of fall two zero one five university of alabama school of medicine university of south alabama and alabama college of osteopathic medicine and the edward via college of osteopathic medicine auburn campus two veterinary colleges auburn university and tuskegee university a dental school university of alabama school of dentistry an optometry college university of alabama at birmingham two pharmacy schools auburn university and samford university and five law schools university of alabama school of law birmingham school of law cumberland school of law miles law school and the thomas goode jones school of law .
 public post secondary education in alabama is overseen by the alabama commission on higher education and the alabama department of postsecondary education .
 colleges and universities in alabama offer degree programs from two year associate degrees to a multitude of doctoral level programs.
 william j.
 samford hall at auburn university in auburn the largest single campus is the university of alabama located in tuscaloosa with three three six zero two enrolled for fall two zero one two .
 troy university was the largest institution in the state in two zero one zero with an enrollment of two nine six eight nine students across four alabama campuses troy dothan montgomery and phenix city as well as sixty learning sites in seventeen other states and eleven other countries.
 the oldest institutions are the public university of north alabama in florence and the catholic church affiliated spring hill college in mobile both founded in one eight three zero .
 accreditation of academic programs is through the southern association of colleges and schools sacs as well as other subject focused national and international accreditation agencies such as the association for biblical higher education abhe the council on occupational education coe and the accrediting council for independent colleges and schools acics .
 according to the two zero one one u.
s.
 news the stadium seats four zero six four six .
 in two zero zero nine bryant denny stadium and jordan hare stadium became the homes of the alabama high school athletic association state football championship games after previously being held at legion field in birmingham.
 professional regions park in hoover hank aaron stadium in mobile alabama has several professional and semi professional sports teams including four minor league baseball teams.
 the talladega superspeedway motorsports complex hosts a series of nascar events.
 it has a seating capacity of one four three zero zero zero and is the thirteenth largest stadium in the world and sixth largest stadium in america.
 also the barber motorsports park has hosted indycar series and rolex sports car series races.
 the atp birmingham was a world championship tennis tournament held from one nine seven three to one nine eight zero .
 alabama has hosted several professional golf tournaments such as the one nine eight four and one nine nine zero pga championship at shoal creek pga tour the mobile lpga tournament of champions airbus lpga classic and yokohama tire lpga classic lpga tour and the tradition champions tour .
 transportation terminal at the montgomery regional airport in montgomery.
 interstate five nine co signed with interstate two zero approaching interstate six five in downtown birmingham.
 aerial view of the port of mobile.
 aviation major airports with sustained commercial operations in alabama include birmingham shuttlesworth international airport bhm huntsville international airport hsv dothan regional airport dhn mobile regional airport mob montgomery regional airport mgm and muscle shoals northwest alabama regional airport msl .
 rail for rail transport amtrak schedules the crescent a daily passenger train running from new york to new orleans with stops at anniston birmingham and tuscaloosa.
 roads alabama has five major interstate roads that cross the state interstate six five i six five travels north south roughly through the middle of the state i two zero i five nine travel from the central west mississippi state line to birmingham where i five nine continues to the north east corner of the state and i two zero continues east towards atlanta i eight five originates in montgomery and travels east northeast to the georgia state line providing a main thoroughfare to atlanta and i one zero traverses the southernmost portion of the state traveling from west to east through mobile.
 another interstate i two two is currently under construction.
 when completed it will connect birmingham with memphis tennessee .
 in addition there are currently five auxiliary interstate routes in the state i one six five in mobile i three five nine in tuscaloosa i four five nine around birmingham i five six five in decatur and huntsville and i seven five nine in gadsden.
 a sixth route i six eight five will be formed when i eight five is rerouted along a new southern bypass of montgomery.
 a proposed northern bypass of birmingham will be designated as i four two two .
 since a direct connection from i two two to i four two two will not be possible i two two two has been proposed as well.
 several u.
s.
 highways also pass through the state such as u.
s.
 route one one us one one us two nine us three one us four three us four five us seven two us seven eight us eight zero us eight two us eight four us nine zero us nine eight us two three one us two seven eight us two eight zero us three three one us four one one and us four three one .
 there are four toll roads in the state montgomery expressway in montgomery tuscaloosa bypass in tuscaloosa emerald mountain expressway in wetumpka and beach express in orange beach .
 ports the port of mobile alabama s only saltwater port is a large seaport on the gulf of mexico with inland waterway access to the midwest by way of the tennessee tombigbee waterway .
 the port of mobile was ranked one two th by tons of traffic in the united states during two zero zero nine .
 the newly expanded container terminal at the port of mobile was ranked as the two five th busiest for container traffic in the nation during two zero one one .
 the state s other ports are on rivers with access to the gulf of mexico.
 water ports of alabama listed from north to south see also outline of alabama organized list of topics about alabama index of alabama related articles lgbt rights in alabama references further reading for a detailed bibliography see the history of alabama .
 atkins leah rawls wayne flynt william warren rogers and david ward.
 alabama the history of a deep south state one nine nine four flynt wayne.
 alabama in the twentieth century two zero zero four owen thomas m.
 history of alabama and dictionary of alabama biography four vols.
 one nine two one .
 jackson harvey h.
 inside alabama a personal history of my state two zero zero four mohl raymond a.
 latinization in the heart of dixie hispanics in late twentieth century alabama alabama review two zero zero two five five four two four three two seven four .
 issn zero zero zero two four three four one peirce neal r.
 the deep south states of america people politics and power in the seven deep south states one nine seven four .
 information on politics and economics one nine six zero seven two .
 williams benjamin buford.
 a literary history of alabama the nineteenth century one nine seven nine .
 wpa.
 guide to alabama one nine three nine external links alabama.
gov official state government web site alabama state guide from the library of congress all about alabama at the alabama department of archives and history alabama association of regional councils energy data statistics for alabama from the u.
s.
 department of energy touralabama.
org alabama department of tourism and travel alabamamosaic a digital repository of materials on alabama s history culture places and people code of alabama one nine seven five at the alabama legislature site usgs real time geographic and other scientific resources of alabama alabama quickfacts from the u.
s.
 census bureau alabama state fact sheet from the u.
s.
 department of agriculture northeast west centre alabama outline index east southwest gulf of mexico south southeast alabama southern united states states and territories established in one eight one nine states of the confederate states of america states of the gulf coast of the united states states of the united states achilles and the nereid cymothoe attic red figure kantharos from volci cabinet des m dailles biblioth que nationale paris head of achilles depicted on a four th century bc coin from kremaste phthia .
 reverse thetis wearing chiton and holding shield of achilles with his ax monogram.
 in greek mythology achilles akhilleus was a greek hero of the trojan war and the central character and greatest warrior of homer s iliad .
 his mother was the nymph thetis and his father peleus was the king of the myrmidons .
 achilles most notable feat during the trojan war was the slaying of the trojan hero hector outside the gates of troy .
 although the death of achilles is not presented in the iliad other sources concur that he was killed near the end of the trojan war by paris who shot him in the heel with an arrow.
 later legends beginning with a poem by statius in the one st century ad state that achilles was invulnerable in all of his body except for his heel.
 because of his death from a small wound in the heel the term achilles heel has come to mean a person s point of weakness.
 etymology achilles name can be analyzed as a combination of akhos grief and laos a people tribe nation.
 in other words achilles is an embodiment of the grief of the people grief being a theme raised numerous times in the iliad frequently by achilles .
 achilles role as the hero of grief forms an ironic juxtaposition with the conventional view of achilles as the hero of kleos glory usually glory in war .
 laos has been construed by gregory nagy following leonard palmer to mean a corps of soldiers a muster .
 with this derivation the name would have a double meaning in the poem when the hero is functioning rightly his men bring grief to the enemy but when wrongly his men get the grief of war.
 the poem is in part about the misdirection of anger on the part of leadership.
 r.
 s.
 p.
 beekes has suggested a pre greek origin of the name.
 the name achilleus was a common and attested name among the greeks soon after the seven th century bc.
 it was also turned into the female form achille a attested in attica in the four th century bc ig ii one six one seven and in the form achillia on a stele in halicarnassus as the name of a female gladiator fighting an amazon .
 birth thetis dipping the infant achilles into the river styx ca.
 one six two five peter paul rubens achilles was the son of the nereid thetis and peleus the king of the myrmidons .
 zeus and poseidon had been rivals for the hand of thetis until prometheus the fore thinker warned zeus of a prophecy that thetis would bear a son greater than his father.
 for this reason the two gods withdrew their pursuit and had her wed peleus.
 there is a tale which offers an alternative version of these events in argonautica iv.
 seven six zero zeus sister and wife hera alludes to thetis chaste resistance to the advances of zeus that thetis was so loyal to hera s marriage bond that she coolly rejected him.
 thetis although a daughter of the sea god nereus was also brought up by hera further explaining her resistance to the advances of zeus.
 the education of achilles ca.
 one seven seven two by james barry according to the achilleid written by statius in the one st century ad and to no surviving previous sources when achilles was born thetis tried to make him immortal by dipping him in the river styx .
 however he was left vulnerable at the part of the body by which she held him his heel see achilles heel achilles tendon .
 it is not clear if this version of events was known earlier.
 in another version of this story thetis anointed the boy in ambrosia and put him on top of a fire to burn away the mortal parts of his body.
 she was interrupted by peleus and abandoned both father and son in a rage.
 however none of the sources before statius makes any reference to this general invulnerability.
 to the contrary in the iliad homer mentions achilles being wounded in book two one the paeonian hero asteropaeus son of pelagon challenged achilles by the river scamander.
 he cast two spears at once one grazed achilles elbow drawing a spurt of blood .
 also in the fragmentary poems of the epic cycle in which we can find description of the hero s death cypria unknown author aithiopis by arctinus of miletus little iliad by lesche of mytilene iliou persis by arctinus of miletus there is no trace of any reference to his general invulnerability or his famous weakness heel in the later vase paintings presenting achilles death the arrow or in many cases arrows hit his body.
 peleus entrusted achilles to chiron the centaur on mt.
 pelion to be reared.
 achilles in the trojan war the rage of achilles by giovanni battista tiepolo the first two lines of the iliad read sing goddess of the rage of peleus son achilles the accursed rage that brought great suffering to the achaeans .
 achilles consuming rage is at times wavering but at other times he cannot be cooled.
 the humanization of achilles by the events of the war is an important theme of the narrative.
 according to the iliad achilles arrived at troy with five zero ships each carrying five zero myrmidons book two .
 he appointed five leaders each leader commanding five zero zero myrmidons menesthius eudorus peisander phoenix and alcimedon book one six .
 telephus when the greeks left for the trojan war they accidentally stopped in mysia ruled by king telephus .
 in the resulting battle achilles gave telephus a wound that would not heal telephus consulted an oracle who stated that he that wounded shall heal .
 guided by the oracle he arrived at argos where achilles healed him in order that he might become their guide for the voyage to troy.
 according to other reports in euripides lost play about telephus he went to aulis pretending to be a beggar and asked achilles to heal his wound.
 achilles refused claiming to have no medical knowledge.
 alternatively telephus held orestes for ransom the ransom being achilles aid in healing the wound.
 odysseus reasoned that the spear had inflicted the wound therefore the spear must be able to heal it.
 pieces of the spear were scraped off onto the wound and telephus was healed.
 troilus according to the cypria the part of the epic cycle that tells the events of the trojan war before achilles wrath when the achaeans desired to return home they were restrained by achilles who afterwards attacked the cattle of aeneas sacked neighboring cities and killed troilus .
 in dares phrygius account of the destruction of troy the latin summary through which the story of achilles was transmitted to medieval europe troilus was a young trojan prince the youngest of king priam s or sometimes apollo and hecuba s five legitimate sons.
 despite his youth he was one of the main trojan war leaders.
 prophecies linked troilus fate to that of troy and so he was ambushed in an attempt to capture him.
 yet achilles struck by the beauty of both troilus and his sister polyxena and overcome with lust directed his sexual attentions on the youth who refusing to yield instead found himself decapitated upon an altar omphalos of apollo.
 later versions of the story suggested troilus was accidentally killed by achilles in an over ardent lovers embrace.
 in this version of the myth achilles death therefore came in retribution for this sacrilege.
 ancient writers treated troilus as the epitome of a dead child mourned by his parents.
 had troilus lived to adulthood the first vatican mythographer claimed troy would have been invincible.
 achilles in the iliad achilles sacrificing to zeus from the ambrosian iliad a five th century illuminated manuscript homer s iliad is the most famous narrative of achilles deeds in the trojan war.
 achilles wrath is the central theme of the poem.
 the homeric epic only covers a few weeks of the war and does not narrate achilles death.
 it begins with achilles withdrawal from battle after he is dishonored by agamemnon the commander of the achaean forces.
 agamemnon had taken a woman named chryseis as his slave.
 her father chryses a priest of apollo begs agamemnon to return her to him.
 agamemnon refuses and apollo sends a plague amongst the greeks.
 the prophet calchas correctly determines the source of the troubles but will not speak unless achilles vows to protect him.
 achilles does so and calchas declares chryseis must be returned to her father.
 agamemnon consents but then commands that achilles battle prize briseis be brought to him to replace chryseis.
 angry at the dishonor of having his plunder and glory taken away and as he says later because he loved briseis with the urging of his mother thetis achilles refuses to fight or lead his troops alongside the other greek forces.
 at this same time burning with rage over agamemnon s theft achilles prays to thetis to convince zeus to help the trojans gain ground in the war so that he may regain his honor.
 as the battle turns against the greeks thanks to the influence of zeus nestor declares that the trojans are winning because agamemnon has angered achilles and urges the king to appease the warrior.
 agamemnon agrees and sends odysseus and two other chieftains ajax and phoenix to achilles with the offer of the return of briseis and other gifts.
 achilles rejects all agamemnon offers him and simply urges the greeks to sail home as he was planning to do.
 the trojans led by hector subsequently push the greek army back toward the beaches and assault the greek ships.
 with the greek forces on the verge of absolute destruction patroclus leads the myrmidons into battle wearing achilles armor though achilles remains at his camp.
 patroclus succeeds in pushing the trojans back from the beaches but is killed by hector before he can lead a proper assault on the city of troy.
 triumphant achilles dragging hector s lifeless body in front of the gates of troy from a panoramic fresco on the upper level of the main hall of the achilleion .
 after receiving the news of the death of patroclus from antilochus the son of nestor achilles grieves over his beloved companion s death and holds many funeral games in his honor.
 his mother thetis comes to comfort the distraught achilles.
 she persuades hephaestus to make new armor for him in place of the armor that patroclus had been wearing which was taken by hector.
 the new armor includes the shield of achilles described in great detail in the poem.
 enraged over the death of patroclus achilles ends his refusal to fight and takes the field killing many men in his rage but always seeking out hector.
 achilles even engages in battle with the river god scamander who becomes angry that achilles is choking his waters with all the men he has killed.
 the god tries to drown achilles but is stopped by hera and hephaestus.
 zeus himself takes note of achilles rage and sends the gods to restrain him so that he will not go on to sack troy itself before the time allotted for its destruction seeming to show that the unhindered rage of achilles can defy fate itself.
 finally achilles finds his prey.
 achilles chases hector around the wall of troy three times before athena in the form of hector s favorite and dearest brother deiphobus persuades hector to stop running and fight achilles face to face.
 after hector realizes the trick he knows the battle is inevitable.
 wanting to go down fighting he charges at achilles with his only weapon his sword but misses.
 accepting his fate hector begs achilles not to spare his life but to treat his body with respect after killing him.
 achilles tells hector it is hopeless to expect that of him declaring that my rage my fury would drive me now to hack your flesh away and eat you raw such agonies you have caused me .
 achilles then kills hector and drags his corpse by its heels behind his chariot during patroclus funeral games.
 with the assistance of the god hermes hector s father priam goes to achilles tent to plead with achilles for the return of hector s body so that he can be buried.
 achilles relents and promises a truce for the duration of the funeral.
 the poem ends with a description of hector s funeral with the doom of troy and achilles himself still to come.
 penthesilea achilles after his temporary truce with priam fought and killed the amazonian warrior queen penthesilea but later grieved over her death.
 at first he was so distracted by her beauty he did not fight as intensely as usual.
 once he realized that his distraction was endangering his life he refocused and killed her.
 memnon and the fall of achilles achilles dying in the gardens of the achilleion in corfu following the death of patroclus achilles closest companion was nestor s son antilochus .
 when memnon king of ethiopia slew antilochus achilles once more obtained revenge on the battlefield killing memnon.
 the fight between achilles and memnon over antilochus echoes that of achilles and hector over patroclus except that memnon unlike hector was also the son of a goddess.
 many homeric scholars argued that episode inspired many details in the iliad s description of the death of patroclus and achilles reaction to it.
 the episode then formed the basis of the cyclic epic aethiopis which was composed after the iliad possibly in the seven th century b.
c.
 the aethiopis is now lost except for scattered fragments quoted by later authors.
 the death of achilles as predicted by hector with his dying breath was brought about by paris with an arrow to the heel according to statius .
 in some versions the god apollo guided paris arrow.
 some retellings also state that achilles was scaling the gates of troy and was hit with a poisoned arrow.
 ajax carries off the body of achilles attic black figure lekythos ca.
 five one zero bc from sicily staatliche antikensammlungen munich all of these versions deny paris any sort of valor owing to the common conception that paris was a coward and not the man his brother hector was and achilles remained undefeated on the battlefield.
 his bones were mingled with those of patroclus and funeral games were held.
 he was represented in the aethiopis as living after his death in the island of leuke at the mouth of the river danube .
 another version of achilles death is that he fell deeply in love with one of the trojan princesses polyxena .
 achilles asks priam for polyxena s hand in marriage.
 priam is willing because it would mean the end of the war and an alliance with the world s greatest warrior.
 but while priam is overseeing the private marriage of polyxena and achilles paris who would have to give up helen if achilles married his sister hides in the bushes and shoots achilles with a divine arrow killing him.
 achilles was cremated and his ashes buried in the same urn as those of patroclus.
 paris was later killed by philoctetes using the enormous bow of heracles .
 fate of achilles armor achilles armor was the object of a feud between odysseus and telamonian ajax ajax the greater .
 they competed for it by giving speeches on why they were the bravest after achilles to their trojan prisoners who after considering both men came to a consensus in favor of odysseus.
 furious ajax cursed odysseus which earned the ire of athena.
 athena temporarily made ajax so mad with grief and anguish that he began killing sheep thinking them his comrades.
 after a while when athena lifted his madness and ajax realized that he had actually been killing sheep ajax was left so ashamed that he committed suicide.
 odysseus eventually gave the armor to neoptolemus the son of achilles.
 a relic claimed to be achilles bronze headed spear was for centuries preserved in the temple of athena on the acropolis of phaselis lycia a port on the pamphylian gulf.
 the city was visited in three three three bc by alexander the great who envisioned himself as the new achilles and carried the iliad with him but his court biographers do not mention the spear.
 however it was shown in the time of pausanias in the two nd century ad.
 upright .
 seven five achilles and ajax playing the board game petteia .
 black figure attic lekythos ca.
 five zero zero bc achilles ajax and a game of petteia numerous paintings on pottery have suggested a tale not mentioned in the literary traditions.
 at some point in the war achilles and ajax were playing a board game petteia .
 they were absorbed in the game and oblivious to the surrounding battle.
 the trojans attacked and reached the heroes who were saved only by an intervention of athena.
 achilles and patroclus the exact nature of achilles relationship with patroclus has been a subject of dispute in both the classical period and modern times.
 in the iliad it appears to be the model of a deep and loyal friendship.
 homer does not suggest that achilles and his close friend patroclus were lovers.
 despite there being no direct evidence in the text of the iliad that achilles and patroclus were lovers this theory was expressed by some later authors.
 commentators from classical antiquity to the present have often interpreted the relationship through the lens of their own cultures.
 in five th century bc athens the intense bond was often viewed in light of the greek custom of paiderasteia .
 in plato s symposium the participants in a dialogue about love assume that achilles and patroclus were a couple phaedrus argues that achilles was the younger and more beautiful one so he was the beloved and patroclus was the lover.
 but ancient greek had no words to distinguish heterosexual and homosexual and it was assumed that a man could both desire handsome young men and have sex with women.
 worship of achilles in antiquity achilles and briseis penthesilea brought her amazon warriors to help the trojans defend their city but was killed in combat by achilles.
 here achilles looms above her as she sinks to the ground.
 there was an archaic heroic cult of achilles on the white island leuce in the black sea off the modern coasts of romania and ukraine with a temple and an oracle which survived into the roman period.
 in the lost epic aithiopis a continuation of the iliad attributed to arktinus of miletos achilles mother thetis returned to mourn him and removed his ashes from the pyre and took them to leuce at the mouths of the danube.
 there the achaeans raised a tumulus for him and celebrated funeral games.
 pliny s natural history mentions a tumulus that is no longer evident insula akchillis tumulo eius viri clara on the island consecrated to him located at a distance of fifty roman miles from peuce by the danube delta and the temple there.
 pausanias has been told that the island is covered with forests and full of animals some wild some tame.
 in this island there is also achilles temple and his statue .
 ruins of a square temple three zero meters to a side possibly that dedicated to achilles were discovered by captain kritzikly in one eight two three but there has been no modern archeological work done on the island.
 pomponius mela tells that achilles is buried in the island named achillea between boristhene and ister.
 the greek geographer dionysius periegetus of bithynia who lived at the time of domitian writes that the island was called leuce because the wild animals which live there are white.
 it is said that there in leuce island reside the souls of achilles and other heroes and that they wander through the uninhabited valleys of this island this is how jove rewarded the men who had distinguished themselves through their virtues because through virtue they had acquired everlasting honor .
 the periplus of the euxine sea gives the following details it is said that the goddess thetis raised this island from the sea for her son achilles who dwells there.
 here is his temple and his statue an archaic work.
 this island is not inhabited and goats graze on it not many which the people who happen to arrive here with their ships sacrifice to achilles.
 in this temple are also deposited a great many holy gifts craters rings and precious stones offered to achilles in gratitude.
 one can still read inscriptions in greek and latin in which achilles is praised and celebrated.
 some of these are worded in patroclus honor because those who wish to be favored by achilles honor patroclus at the same time.
 there are also in this island countless numbers of sea birds which look after achilles temple.
 every morning they fly out to sea wet their wings with water and return quickly to the temple and sprinkle it.
 and after they finish the sprinkling they clean the hearth of the temple with their wings.
 other people say still more that some of the men who reach this island come here intentionally.
 they bring animals in their ships destined to be sacrificed.
 some of these animals they slaughter others they set free on the island in achilles honor.
 but there are others who are forced to come to this island by sea storms.
 as they have no sacrificial animals but wish to get them from the god of the island himself they consult achilles oracle.
 they ask permission to slaughter the victims chosen from among the animals that graze freely on the island and to deposit in exchange the price which they consider fair.
 but in case the oracle denies them permission because there is an oracle here they add something to the price offered and if the oracle refuses again they add something more until at last the oracle agrees that the price is sufficient.
 and then the victim doesn t run away any more but waits willingly to be caught.
 so there is a great quantity of silver there consecrated to the hero as price for the sacrificial victims.
 to some of the people who come to this island achilles appears in dreams to others he would appear even during their navigation if they were not too far away and would instruct them as to which part of the island they would better anchor their ships .
 quoted in densu ianu the heroic cult of achilles on leuce island was widespread in antiquity not only along the sea lanes of the pontic sea but also in maritime cities whose economic interests were tightly connected to the riches of the black sea.
 achilles from leuce island was venerated as pontarches the lord and master of the pontic sea the protector of sailors and navigation.
 sailors went out of their way to offer sacrifice.
 to achilles of leuce were dedicated a number of important commercial port cities of the greek waters achilleion in messenia stephanus byzantinus achilleios in laconia pausanias iii.
 two five four nicolae densu ianu densu ianu one nine one three even though he recognized achilles in the name of aquileia and in the north arm of the danube delta the arm of chilia achileii though his conclusion that leuce had sovereign rights over pontos evokes modern rather than archaic sea law.
 leuce had also a reputation as a place of healing.
 pausanias iii.
 one nine one three reports that the delphic pythia sent a lord of croton to be cured of a chest wound.
 ammianus marcellinus xxii.
 eight attributes the healing to waters aquae on the island.
 worship of achilles in modern times the achilleion in corfu in the region of gastouri to the south of the city of corfu greece empress of austria elisabeth of bavaria also known as sissi built in one eight nine zero a summer palace with achilles as its central theme and it is a monument to platonic romanticism .
 the palace naturally was named after achilles achilleion .
 this elegant structure abounds with paintings and statues of achilles both in the main hall and in the lavish gardens depicting the heroic and tragic scenes of the trojan war .
 other stories achilles as guardian of the palace in the gardens of the achilleion in corfu.
 he gazes northward toward the city.
 the inscription in greek reads i.
e.
 achilles some post homeric sources claim that in order to keep achilles safe from the war thetis or in some versions peleus hides the young man at the court of lycomedes king of skyros .
 there achilles is disguised as a girl and lives among lycomedes daughters perhaps under the name pyrrha the red haired girl .
 with lycomedes daughter deidamia whom in the account of statius he rapes achilles there fathers a son neoptolemus also called pyrrhus after his father s possible alias .
 according to this story odysseus learns from the prophet calchas that the achaeans would be unable to capture troy without achilles aid.
 odysseus goes to skyros in the guise of a peddler selling women s clothes and jewelry and places a shield and spear among his goods.
 when achilles instantly takes up the spear odysseus sees through his disguise and convinces him to join the greek campaign.
 in another version of the story odysseus arranges for a trumpet alarm to be sounded while he was with lycomedes women while the women flee in panic achilles prepares to defend the court thus giving his identity away.
 in book one one of homer s odyssey odysseus sails to the underworld and converses with the shades.
 one of these is achilles who when greeted as blessed in life blessed in death responds that he would rather be a slave to the worst of masters than be king of all the dead.
 but achilles then asks odysseus of his son s exploits in the trojan war and when odysseus tells of neoptolemus heroic actions achilles is filled with satisfaction.
 this leaves the reader with an ambiguous understanding of how achilles felt about the heroic life.
 achilles was worshipped as a sea god in many of the greek colonies on the black sea the location of the mythical white island which he was said to inhabit after his death together with many other heroes.
 the kings of the epirus claimed to be descended from achilles through his son neoptolemus.
 alexander the great son of the epirote princess olympias could therefore also claim this descent and in many ways strove to be like his great ancestor.
 he is said to have visited the tomb of achilles at achilleion while passing troy.
 in ad two one six the roman emperor caracalla while on his way to war against parthia emulated alexander by holding games around achilles tumulus.
 achilles fought and killed the amazon helene .
 some also said he married medea and that after both their deaths they were united in the elysian fields of hades as hera promised thetis in apollonius argonautica .
 in some versions of the myth achilles has a relationship with his captive briseis .
 achilles in greek tragedy the greek tragedian aeschylus wrote a trilogy of plays about achilles given the title achilleis by modern scholars.
 the tragedies relate the deeds of achilles during the trojan war including his defeat of hector and eventual death when an arrow shot by paris and guided by apollo punctures his heel.
 extant fragments of the achilleis and other aeschylean fragments have been assembled to produce a workable modern play.
 the first part of the achilleis trilogy the myrmidons focused on the relationship between achilles and chorus who represent the achaean army and try to convince achilles to give up his quarrel with agamemnon only a few lines survive today.
 in plato s symposium phaedrus points out that aeschylus portrayed achilles as the lover and patroclus as the beloved phaedrus argues that this is incorrect because achilles being the younger and more beautiful of the two was the beloved who loved his lover so much that he chose to die to revenge him.
 the tragedian sophocles also wrote the lovers of achilles a play with achilles as the main character.
 only a few fragments survive.
 towards the end of the five th century bc a more negative view of achilles emerges in greek drama euripides refers to achilles in a bitter or ironic tone in hecuba electra and iphigenia in aulis .
 achilles in greek philosophy the philosopher zeno of elea centered one of his paradoxes on an imaginary footrace between swift footed achilles and a tortoise by which he attempted to show that achilles could not catch up to a tortoise with a head start and therefore that motion and change were impossible.
 as a student of the monist parmenides and a member of the eleatic school zeno believed time and motion to be illusions.
 achilles in roman and medieval literature the romans who traditionally traced their lineage to troy took a highly negative view of achilles.
 vergil refers to achilles as a savage and a merciless butcher of men while horace portrays achilles ruthlessly slaying women and children.
 other writers such as catullus propertius and ovid represent a second strand of disparagement with an emphasis on achilles erotic career.
 this strand continues in latin accounts of the trojan war by writers such as dictys cretensis and dares phrygius and in beno t de sainte maure s roman de troie and guido delle colonne s historia destructionis troiae which remained the most widely read and retold versions of the matter of troy until the one seven th century.
 achilles was described by the byzantine chronicler leo the deacon not as hellene but as scythian while according to the byzantine author john malalas his army was made up of a tribe previously known as myrmidons and later as bulgars .
 popular culture the wrath of achilles by fran ois l on benouville one eight two one one eight five nine mus e fabre .
 achilles is portrayed as a former hero who has become lazy and devoted to the love of patroclus in william shakespeare s troilus and cressida .
 achilles appears in dante s inferno .
 he is seen in hell s circle of lust.
 achilles is the subject of the poem achille s a fragment by johann wolfgang von goethe .
 achilles is a major character in madeline miller s debut novel the song of achilles two zero one one which won the two zero one two orange prize for fiction .
 the novel explores the relationship between patroclus and achilles from boyhood to the fateful events of the iliad .
 achilles is a central and playable character in koei s warriors legends of troy .
 achilles is mentioned in tennyson s ulysses .
.
.
we shall touch the happy isles and meet there the great achilles whom we knew.
 achilles akhilles is killed by a poisoned kentaur arrow shot by kassandra in marion zimmer bradley s novel the firebrand one nine eight seven .
 in disney s hercules achilles was mentioned to have been a student of philoctetes and a reference to his heel being his weakness was made.
 later in the film some people of thebes mock philoctetes for his training of achilles.
 achilles appears in hercules episode achilles and the living legend voiced by dom irrera .
 he is shown as a washed out has been ever since he was defeated.
 achilles appears in the light novel fate apocrypha as the rider of red.
 achilles is one of various narrators in colleen mccullough s novel the song of troy one nine nine eight .
 achilles is the main character in david malouf s novel ransom two zero zero nine .
 the ghost of achilles appears in rick riordan s the last olympian two zero zero nine .
 he warns percy jackson about the curse of achilles and its side effects.
 achilles is one of the main characters in dan simmons s novels illium two zero zero three and olympos two zero zero five .
 achilles armor appears as downloadable content in the two zero one three video game god of war ascension .
 the role of achilles has been played in film by piero lulli in ulysses one nine five five stanley baker in helen of troy one nine five six riley ottenhof in something about zeus one nine five eight arturo dominici in la guerra di troia one nine six two gordon mitchell in the fury of achilles one nine six two steve davislim in la belle h l ne tv one nine nine six richard trewett in the miniseries the odyssey tv one nine nine seven joe montana in helen of troy tv two zero zero three brad pitt in troy two zero zero four achilles has frequently been mentioned in music achilles is a hardcore band.
 achilles is an oratorio by german composer max bruch one eight eight five .
 achilles agony by manowar the triumph of steel one nine nine two .
 achilles last stand is a song by led zeppelin presence one nine seven six .
 achilles revenge is a song by warlord .
 achilles wrath is a concert piece by sean o loughlin .
 achilles is referred to in bob dylan s song temporary like achilles .
 cry of achilles is the lead track off of alter bridge s fourth album fortress .
 namesakes the name of achilles has been used for at least nine royal navy warships since one seven four four both as hms achilles and with the french spelling hms achille .
 a six zero gun ship of that name served at the battle of belleisle in one seven six one while a seven four gun ship served at the battle of trafalgar .
 other battle honours include walcheren one eight zero nine .
 an armored cruiser of that name served in the royal navy during the first world war.
 hmnzs achilles was a leander class cruiser which served with the royal new zealand navy in world war ii.
 it became famous for its part in the battle of the river plate alongside and .
 in addition to earning the battle honour river plate hmnzs achilles also served at guadalcanal one nine four two four three and okinawa in one nine four five .
 after returning to the royal navy the ship was sold to the indian navy in one nine four eight but when she was scrapped parts of the ship were saved and preserved in new zealand.
 capois la mort a slave who fought in the haitian revolution was nicknamed the black achilles because of his heroic performance during the last battle against the french.
 prince achileas andreas of greece and denmark was the grandson of the deposed greek king constantine ii .
 the character achilles in ender s shadow by orson scott card shares his namesake s cunning mind and ruthless attitude.
 in the star trek universe the achilles class is an advanced type of federation battleship brought into service at the outbreak of the dominion war though not seen in any of the canon star trek tv series.
 achilles armor and valor are included in the video games titan quest and tq immortal throne .
 the two zero zero five video game spartan total warrior features two campaign missions located in the fictional buried city of troy with the story arc for this segment of the game culminating in the discovery of the tomb of achilles and the acquisition of the spear of achilles.
 notes references homer iliad homer odyssey xi four six seven five four zero pseudo apollodorus bibliotheca iii xiii five eight apollodorus epitome iii one four v seven ovid metamorphoses xi two one seven two six five xii five eight zero xiii three nine eight ovid heroides iii apollonius rhodius argonautica iv seven eight three eight seven nine dante alighieri the divine comedy inferno v.
 bibliography ileana chirassi colombo heroes achilleus theos apollon.
 in il mito greco ed.
 bruno gentili anthony edwards achilles in the underworld iliad odyssey and thiopis greek roman and byzantine studies two six one nine eight five pp.
 two one five two two seven achilles in the odyssey ideologies of heroism in the homeric epic beitr ge zur klassischen philologie one seven one meisenheim one nine eight five kleos aphthiton and oral theory classical quarterly three eight one nine eight eight pp.
 two five three zero h l ne monsacr les larmes d achille.
 le h ros la femme et la souffrance dans la po sie d hom re paris albin michel one nine eight four gregory nagy the best of the acheans concepts of the hero in archaic greek poetry johns hopkins university one nine nine nine rev.
 edition the name of achilles questions of etymology and folk etymology illinois classical studies one nine one nine nine four dale s.
 sinos the entry of achilles into greek epic ph.
d.
